MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

Preprint 15 December 2021

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0

Impact of Massive Binary Star and Cosmic Evolution on Gravitational
Wave Observations II: Double Compact Object Rates and Properties
Floor S. Broekgaarden,1★ Edo Berger,1 Simon Stevenson,2,3 Stephen Justham,4,5,6,7 Ilya Mandel,8,3,9
Martyna Chruślińska,7,10 Lieke A. C. van Son,1,6,7 Tom Wagg,11,1,7 Alejandro Vigna-Gómez,12,13
Selma E. de Mink,7,6,1 Debatri Chattopadhyay,2,3 Coenraad J. Neĳssel9

arXiv:2112.05763v2 [astro-ph.HE] 14 Dec 2021

1 Center for Astrophysics | Harvard & Smithsonian, 60 Garden St., Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
2 Center for Astrophysics and Supercomputing, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn VIC 3122, Australia
3 The ARC Center of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery – OzGrav, Hawthorn VIC 3122, Australia
4 School of Astronomy & Space Science, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beĳing 100012, China
5 National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beĳing 100012, China
6 Anton Pannekoek Institute for Astronomy and GRAPPA, University of Amsterdam, Postbus 94249, 1090 GE Amsterdam, The Netherlands
7 Max-Planck-Institut für Astrophysik, Karl-Schwarzschild-Straße 1, 85741 Garching, Germany
8 Monash Centre for Astrophysics, School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
9 Birmingham Institute for Gravitational Wave Astronomy and School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom
10 Institute of Mathematics, Astrophysics and Particle Physics, Radboud University Nĳmegen, PO Box 9010, 6500 GL Nĳmegen
11 Department of Astronomy, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195
12 Niels Bohr International Academy, The Niels Bohr Institute, Blegdamsvej 17, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark
13 DARK, Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Jagtvej 128, DK-2200, Copenhagen, Denmark

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT

Making the most of the rapidly increasing population of gravitational-wave detections of black hole (BH) and neutron star (NS)
mergers requires comparing observations with population synthesis predictions. In this work we investigate the combined
impact from the key uncertainties in population synthesis modelling of the isolated binary evolution channel: the physical
processes in massive binary-star evolution and the star formation history as a function of metallicity, 𝑍, and redshift 𝑧, S(𝑍, 𝑧).
Considering these uncertainties we create 560 different publicly available model realizations and calculate the rate and distribution
characteristics of detectable BHBH, BHNS, and NSNS mergers. We find that our stellar evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧) variations can
impact the predicted intrinsic and detectable merger rates by factors 102 –104 . We find that BHBH rates are dominantly impacted
by S(𝑍, 𝑧) variations, NSNS rates by stellar evolution variations and BHNS rates by both. We then consider the combined impact
from all uncertainties considered in this work on the detectable mass distribution shapes (chirp mass, individual masses and
mass ratio). We find that the BHNS mass distributions are predominantly impacted by massive binary-star evolution changes.
For BHBH and NSNS we find that both uncertainties are important. We also find that the shape of the delay time and birth
metallicity distributions are typically dominated by the choice of S(𝑍, 𝑧) for BHBH, BHNS and NSNS. We identify several
examples of robust features in the mass distributions predicted by all 560 models, such that we expect more than 95 percent of
BHBH detections to contain a BH & 8 M and have mass ratios . 4. Our work demonstrates that it is essential to consider a
wide range of allowed models to study double compact object merger rates and properties. Conversely, larger observed samples
could allow us to decipher currently unconstrained stages of stellar and binary evolution.
Key words: (transients:) black hole - neutron star mergers – gravitational waves – stars: evolution

1 INTRODUCTION
The population of detected gravitational-wave (GW) events from
binary black hole (BHBH), black hole–neutron star (BHNS) and
binary neutron star (NSNS) mergers is rapidly increasing (Abbott
et al. 2019, 2020a, 2021a; The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al.
2021b). These mergers carry unique information about the properties
of BHs and NSs (such as their masses and spins), which in turn probes

★ E-mail: floor.broekgaarden@cfa.harvard.edu

© 2021 The Authors

the formation, lives, and explosive deaths of massive stars throughout cosmic history (e.g. Abbott et al. 2021b; The LIGO Scientific
Collaboration et al. 2021c). To extract information from these double
compact object (DCO) detections requires comparing their observed
properties, to theoretically simulated populations modelling their
formation pathways.
A variety of formation channels for DCO mergers have been proposed (see Mandel & Farmer 2018; Mapelli 2021, for reviews), with
one of the most prominent pathways being the isolated binary evolution channel, where the merging DCO systems are assumed to form

2

Broekgaarden et al.

from pairs of massive stars in wide, isolated, binary systems. This
formation pathway can currently account for the observed DCO rates
(Mandel & Broekgaarden 2021) and many of the observed DCO
source properties (e.g., Vigna-Gómez et al. 2018; Belczynski et al.
2020, Broekgaarden & Berger 2021, but see §4.2 for a discussion).
However, modelling theoretical populations of DCO mergers from
the isolated binary evolution channel is challenging as the simulations
suffer from two key uncertainties: First, various physical processes in
massive binary star evolution are uncertain; these include key evolutionary stages such as wind mass loss, stable mass transfer, common
envelope (CE) episodes, and supernovae (SNe), which significantly
impact the predicted rates and properties of DCO mergers. Second,
there are critical uncertainties in the cosmic star formation and chemical evolution history, which impact the metallicity-dependent star
formation rate density S(𝑍, 𝑧), which is a function of birth metallicity 𝑍 and redshift 𝑧. Uncertainties in S(𝑍, 𝑧) also significantly
impact the predicted rate and properties of DCO mergers as the birth
metallicity significantly affects stellar evolution, including mass loss
through line-driven winds and the (maximum) radial expansion.
Earlier works investigating the impact from stellar evolution and
S(𝑍, 𝑧) uncertainties on the simulated DCO population typically
focused on exploring only one of these two sets of uncertainties.
For example, studies including Dominik et al. (2015), Giacobbo &
Mapelli (2018), Kruckow et al. (2018), and Belczynski et al. (2020)
explored population synthesis models with a large number of different
massive binary stellar evolution assumptions, but only investigated
one or a few S(𝑍, 𝑧) models. On the other hand, studies including
Chruślińska et al. (2019), Neĳssel et al. (2019), Tang et al. (2020),
and Briel et al. (2021) focused on exploring a wide range of S(𝑍, 𝑧)
models, but only considered one or a few different stellar evolution
realizations. By only focusing on one of the two uncertainties it remains challenging to directly understand the combined or relative
impact from the massive (binary) stellar evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧) uncertainties on the detectable DCO population. This limits our ability
to learn from GW observations and constrain the models.
Recently, Santoliquido et al. (2021) improved on this by presenting
a large set of binary star evolution model variations (for mass transfer,
CE phases and SNe) as well as S(𝑍, 𝑧) models, exploring the impact
from each of the uncertainties on the predicted DCO merger rates
(although the authors do not present the combined impact from both
uncertainties except for their 𝛼1 and 𝛼5 model variations in their
Figure 7). In addition, Chu et al. (2021) carried out a large study
investigating the impact from variations in the CE phase and SN
kicks in combination with four different S(𝑍, 𝑧) models focusing on
their impact on the merger rates of NSNS mergers. However, besides
impacting the merger rates, variations in stellar evolution models
and S(𝑍, 𝑧) are also expected to impact the DCO merger distribution
shapes of the properties of the detectable mergers. A large systematic
study exploring this for GW events from all three types of DCO
mergers (BHBH, BHNS and NSNS) is currently missing.
In Broekgaarden et al. (2021, from hereon Paper I), we improved
on this by investigating the combined impact from uncertainties in
both massive binary star evolution and the S(𝑍, 𝑧) on the predicted
rate and distribution shapes focusing on, as a first step, the GWdetectable BHNS mergers. Here we continue this work by studying all
three GW-detectable DCO merger types and by adding extra model
realizations. We use rapid binary stellar evolution synthesis simulations coupled with analytical prescriptions for S(𝑍, 𝑧) to present the
DCO rate and properties for a total of 560 model realizations. Our
method is described in §2. We present the impact from the physical
processes in massive binary star evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧) on the predicted rate and shape of the distribution functions for DCO mergers
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

in §3. We discuss these results in §4 and present our conclusions in
§5.

2 METHOD
We use the simulations and methodology presented in Paper I. Here
we add new models F, G, J, S and T, which leads to a minor shift
in the model labels. Our models explore the key assumptions in
both massive (binary) star evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧), leading to 560
(20 binary stellar evolution × 28 S(𝑍, 𝑧)) model realizations. We
particularly choose our model variations to explore a broad span of
uncertainty in the modelling. For that reason some of the variations
are somewhat extreme (e.g., models S and T), but are chosen to
explore their possible impact on the rate and distribution shapes of
DCO mergers. We summarize our most important model assumptions
below and summarize the model variations in Table 1 (massive binary
star evolution) and Table A1 (S(𝑍, 𝑧)). More details can be found in
the Appendix and in Paper I.
2.1 Massive binary-star population models
We simulate populations of GW sources with the rapid binary population synthesis code from the COMPAS1 suite (Stevenson et al.
2017; Barrett et al. 2018; Vigna-Gómez et al. 2018; Broekgaarden
et al. 2019; Neĳssel et al. 2019; Team COMPAS: J. Riley et al.
2021). We model the formation of BH and NS mergers from the isolated binary evolution channel where the merging DCOs form from
massive stars born in a binary system (Smarr & Blandford 1976;
Srinivasan 1989). We explore uncertainties in our massive (binary)
star evolution assumptions by studying 20 binary population synthesis model variations. We further use the efficient sampling algorithm
STROOPWAFEL (Broekgaarden et al. 2019) to simulate & 106 binary systems for 53 different 𝑍 values, resulting in typically ∼ 107
DCO mergers in each simulation, making it one of the best-sampled
population synthesis studies of its kind.
For our default model (A) settings we use the fiducial model summarized in Paper I. For the remaining models we change one population parameter at a time (relative to the fiducial model) to explore
the impact of the uncertain model assumptions. The only exception
is model F (E+K), which combines the model changes from both
models E and K. Our 20 models are summarized in Table 1 and we
refer to them throughout the rest of the paper by the letters A to
T and the abbreviated label names given in the second column of
Table 1. We focus on (and decide to use) the stellar evolution and
the S(𝑍, 𝑧) variations mentioned below as these are commonly used
in population synthesis settings, see Broekgaarden et al. (2021) for
more details.
In models B, C, D, E and F we explore uncertainties in binary mass
transfer prescriptions. Of these, models B, C and D vary the mass
transfer efficiency. This is defined in COMPAS by the parameter 𝛽,
which determines for a given donated mass rate the fraction that is
accreted by the companion star: 𝛽 ≡ (d𝑀acc /d𝑡)/(− d𝑀donor /d𝑡),
with 𝑀acc and 𝑀donor being the mass of the accretor and donor stars,
respectively, and 𝑡 the time (where d𝑡 is the simulation time step).
The excess mass is assumed to leave the binary from the vicinity
of the accreting star through ‘isotropic re-emission’ (e.g., Massevitch & Yungelson 1975; Bhattacharya & van den Heuvel 1991;

1

Compact Object Mergers: Population Astrophysics and Statistics, https:
//compas.science

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes
𝜇

Label

Variation

A

fiducial

–

B
C
D
E

𝛽 = 0.25
𝛽 = 0.5
𝛽 = 0.75
unstable/no case BB

F

E+K

fixed mass transfer efficiency of 𝛽 = 0.25
fixed mass transfer efficiency of 𝛽 = 0.5
fixed mass transfer efficiency of 𝛽 = 0.75
case BB mass transfer is always unstable
case BB mass transfer is always unstable &
HG donor stars initiating a CE may survive

G
H
I
J
K

𝛼 = 0.1
𝛼 = 0.5
𝛼=2
𝛼 = 10
optimistic CE

CE efficiency parameter 𝛼 = 0.1
CE efficiency parameter 𝛼 = 0.5
CE efficiency parameter 𝛼 = 2
CE efficiency parameter 𝛼 = 10
HG donor stars initiating a CE may survive

L
M
N
O
P
Q
R

rapid SN
𝑚NS = 2 M
𝑚NS = 3 M
no PISN
1𝐷 = 100 km s−1
𝜎rms
1𝐷 = 30 km s−1
𝜎rms
𝑣k,BH = 0

Fryer rapid SN remnant mass model
maximum NS mass is fixed to 2 M
maximum NS mass is fixed to 3 M
no PISN and pulsational-PISN
1D = 100 km s−1 for core-collapse SNe
𝜎rms
1D = 30 km s−1 for core-collapse SNe
𝜎rms
we assume BHs receive no natal kick

S
T

𝑓WR = 0.1
𝑓WR = 5

Wolf-Rayet wind factor 𝑓WR = 0.1
Wolf-Rayet wind factor 𝑓WR = 5

Table 1. List of the 20 binary population synthesis models studied in this
work. 𝜇 and ‘Label’ denote the alphabetical letter and abbreviated name used
to label each model, ‘Variation’ denotes what we changed compared to the
fiducial settings (model A). Models B, C, D, E and F vary mass transfer
assumptions, models G, H, I, J and K vary common-envelope assumptions,
models L, M, N, O, P, Q and R vary supernova assumptions and models S
and T vary our Wolf-Rayet wind assumptions. Acronyms used are: commonenvelope (CE), Hertzsprung Gap (HG), supernova (SN) neutron star (NS),
black hole (BH) and pair-instability SN (PISN). We additionally use the
subscripts root-mean-square (rms), one-dimensional (1D) and Wolf-Rayet
(WR). Each model varies one assumption compared to the fiducial model,
except for model F where we vary two assumptions (namely those from model
E and K; unstable case BB and optimistic CE)
.

Soberman et al. 1997) and the angular momentum loss is calculated
accordingly (cf., Equations 32 and 33 in Belczynski et al. 2008).
Our fiducial model (A) assumes the accretion rate is limited by the
star’s thermal timescale: d𝑀acc /d𝑡 ≤ 10𝑀acc /𝜏KH , where 𝜏KH is the
Kelvin-Helmholtz (thermal) timescale2 , and the factor of 10 is added
to take into account the expansion of the accretor due to mass transfer
(cf., Paczyński & Sienkiewicz 1972, Hurley et al. 2002 and Schneider et al. 2015). Models B, C and D assume a different accretion rate
limit for stars by fixing 𝛽 to 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75, respectively. All of
our models assume an Eddington-limited accretion rate for compact
objects. In our fiducial model we assume that case BB mass transfer,
which is mass transfer from a stripped post-helium-burning star onto
the accretor (Delgado & Thomas 1981), is always stable. Model E
explores a variation where case BB (and case BC, but these are more
rare) mass transfer is assumed to always be unstable, leading to a CE
phase. This assumption causes case BB mass transferring systems
to merge as stars in model E as our fiducial model assumes the now
unstable CE phase initiated by a (helium) Hertzsprung Gap star is
unsuccessful and leads to a merger (as described further in the ‘pes2

Given in Equation 61 of Hurley et al. (2002), where we use a pre-factor of
30 Myr from Equation 2 in Kalogera & Webbink (1996).

3

simistic CE assumption’ in the next paragraph). We therefore also
add model F, which explores the effect of assuming unstable case BB
mass transfer, but allowing Hertzsprung Gap donor stars to survive
a CE phase (the ‘optimistic CE assumption’).
In models G, H, I, J and K we explore the effect of changing the
CE prescription assumptions, which in COMPAS are parameterized
using the ‘𝛼–𝜆’ formalism from Webbink (1984) and de Kool (1990).
Our fiducial model assumes a CE efficiency of 𝛼CE = 1 and uses
for 𝜆 the “Nanjing lambda” prescription (cf., Dominik et al. 2012),
which is based on models from Xu & Li (2010a,b). In models G, H,
I and J we change the CE efficiency to fixed values of 0.1, 0.5, 2 and
10, respectively. Compared to the fiducial model, lower and higher
values of 𝛼CE reduce and increase the efficiency with which the CE is
ejected, respectively. In model K (and model F) we allow Hertzsprung
gap stars that initiate a CE to possibly survive the CE (also known
as the ‘optimistic’ CE assumption), whereas in our fiducial model
these are assumed to always lead to an unsuccessful CE ejection (and
merger), the ‘pessimistic’ CE scenario (cf., Dominik et al. 2012).
In models L, M, N, O, P, Q and R we vary the SN prescription
assumptions. In model L we use the ‘rapid’ SN remnant mass model
of Fryer et al. (2012) instead of their ‘delayed’ model, which is
implemented in our fiducial model. The rapid model creates a mass
gap between ≈ 2−6 M , where no BHs form, whereas in the delayed
model such BHs can form. Models M and N change our assumption
for the maximum NS mass, by default 2.5 M , to 2 M and 3 M ,
respectively and we adapt the remnant mass prescription from Fryer
et al. (2012) accordingly. In model O we do not use the prescription
for pair-instability SNe and pulsational pair-instability SNe, therefore
allowing the formation of BHs in the mass range of ≈ 40−100 M . In
models P and Q we change the root mean square velocity dispersion
1D ) for the Maxwellian SN natal kick distribution for both BHs
(𝜎rms
and NSs, to 100 km s−1 and 30 km s−1 , respectively (the fiducial
1D = 265 km s−1 ). For all our models we assume that
model uses 𝜎rms
a fraction of the ejected material ( 𝑓fb ) falls back onto the compact
object and we adjust the remnant mass and re-scale the SN kick
magnitude accordingly (cf., Fryer et al. 2012). For ultra-stripped
SNe and electron-capture SNe we always draw the SN kick using
1𝐷 =
a one-dimensional root-mean-square velocity dispersion of 𝜎rms
30 km s−1 following Pfahl et al. (2002) and Podsiadlowski et al.
(2004). In model R we assume instead that only all BHs receive zero
natal kicks, 𝑣 k = 0 km s−1 .
Finally, models S and T explore the assumptions for the mass loss
rate in Wolf-Rayet winds. Our Wolf-Rayet wind prescription follows
Belczynski et al. (2010), which is based on Hamann & Koesterke
(1998) and Vink & de Koter (2005), by parameterizing the wind
strength with a multiplicative parameter 𝑓WR (cf., Barrett et al. 2018).
By default we use 𝑓WR = 1 and in models S and T we vary this to 0.1
and 5, respectively, which largely spans the possible range for WolfRayet winds inferred from observations (e.g., Vink 2017; Hamann
et al. 2019; Shenar et al. 2019; Sander & Vink 2020).

2.2 Metallicity-dependent star formation rate density models
The time between formation and merger of a DCO can range up to
many Gyr (e.g., Neĳssel et al. 2019). As a result, the DCOs that are
detected by current ground-based GW observatories can originate
from stars that formed throughout a wide range of redshifts with a
large variety of birth metallicities (e.g., Chruślińska & Nelemans
2019). Similar to Paper I, we follow the method of Neĳssel et al.
(2019) to create a metallicity-dependent star formation rate density
S(𝑍, 𝑧), which describes the star formation history as a function of
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

4

Broekgaarden et al.

birth (initial) metallicity3 𝑍 and redshift 𝑧. To explore uncertainties in
S(𝑍, 𝑧), we use a total of 28 S(𝑍, 𝑧) models. Each model convolves
a star formation rate density (SFRD)4 with a metallicity probability distribution function, d𝑃/d𝑍. Our first model xyz = 000 (see
Table A1 for the labeling) is the so-called ‘preferred’ phenomenological model from Neĳssel et al. (2019), which they fit to match the
BHBH observations from the first two observing runs by LIGO and
Virgo. The other 27 (3 × 3 × 3) models are constructed by combining
a SFRD with a galaxy stellar mass function, the number density of
galaxies per logarithmic mass bin, (GSMF), and a mass-metallicity
relation (MZR). The three variations for each SFRD, GSMF and
MZR that we consider are given in Table A1. Although many of
the prescriptions in these models oversimplify the complex S(𝑍, 𝑧)
that is evident from observations, these prescriptions provide a convenient parametrization for binary population synthesis studies. For
more details about caveats and uncertainties in the modelling of
S(𝑍, 𝑧) within binary population synthesis we refer the reader to
Chruślińska & Nelemans (2019), Neĳssel et al. (2019), Boco et al.
(2021) and references therein.

3 RESULTS
3.1 Metallicity specific merger yields
In Figure 1 we show the calculated formation yields (R form ) for
BHBH, BHNS and NSNS mergers per unit solar mass of stars formed
(d𝑀SFR ) as a function of 𝑍 for our 20 binary population synthesis
models. This formation yield only includes DCO systems that have
a GW driven inspiral time (𝑡 inspiral ) that is smaller than the Hubble
time (≈ 14 Gyr) and is given by
R form (𝑍) =

d𝑁form
(𝑍),
d𝑀SFR

(1)

where we convert the number of mergers in our COMPAS realizations
to formation yields by integrating our simulation range over the full
initial parameter space of binary systems (e.g., the full initial mass
range of stars) and assuming a corrected5 binary fraction of 𝑓bin = 1
(consistent with e.g., Sana 2017). Details are given in Paper I.
3.1.1 Impact from the binary massive star evolution assumptions
and metallicity
Figure 1 demonstrates that the variation in the BHBH merger formation yield is typically dominated by 𝑍, causing variations on the
order of O (102 ) between 𝑍 ≈ 0.001 and 𝑍 ≈ Z . Variations in our
massive binary population synthesis assumptions impact the BHBH
merger yield only with factors of up to ≈ 3 at 𝑍 . 0.1 Z and on the
order of O (10) for most stellar evolution models at higher 𝑍. The
exceptions to this include model T ( 𝑓WR = 5), which has a much
lower BHBH yield (by O (102 )) compared to other stellar evolution
models for 𝑍 & 0.2 Z where BH formation is drastically reduced
due to the strong stellar wind mass loss. Other examples include

3

Where Z is the fractional metallicity, such that X + Y + Z = 1 with X and
Y the mass fractions of hydrogen and helium, respectively.
4 We use S (𝑍 , 𝑧) for the metallicity-dependent star formation rate density
as a function of metallicity and redshift and SFRD for the total star formation
rate density across all metallicities, which we model as only a function of
redshift.
5 Corrected to take into account the differences in parameter range between
population synthesis and observations, see de Mink & Belczynski (2015).

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

the optimistic CE models (F and K) that have higher BHBH yields
compared to other stellar evolution models for 𝑍 & 0.2 Z .
The scatter in the BHNS and NSNS formation yields, on the other
hand, are typically dominated by variations in the stellar and binary
evolution models over most of the 𝑍 range, leading to variations of
& O (102 ) in the rates, compared to typical ranges of . O (10) from
variations in 𝑍 for most models.
3.1.2 Trends in the metallicity-dependent formation yields
As can be seen in Figure 1, the formation yield of BHBH mergers is
constant at low metallicities and then steeply declines at 𝑍 & 0.1 Z
for all model variations. This steep decline of merging BHBHs at
higher metallicities has been pointed out previously (e.g., Belczynski et al. 2010; Dominik et al. 2012), and is consistent with various
recent works including Giacobbo et al. (2018), Giacobbo & Mapelli
(2018), Klencki et al. (2018), Chruślińska & Nelemans (2019), Neijssel et al. (2019) and Santoliquido et al. (2021), demonstrating that
this trend is present among many different population synthesis studies and simulation settings. This decline is due to several metallicity
dependent effects. First, stronger stellar winds at higher metallicities lead to increased mass loss and hence wider binaries with less
massive DCOs, reducing the fraction of BHBHs that will merge in a
Hubble time. In addition, the less massive BHs are assumed to have
smaller amounts of fallback and hence receive larger natal kicks in
our simulations, increasing the fraction that is disrupted during the
SN (cf., Fryer et al. 2012; Klencki et al. 2018; Renzo et al. 2019).
Indeed, in the model variations where BHs receive lower or no SN
kick (Q and R) or the Wolf-Rayet winds are weaker (model S) the
decline in BHBH yield is less severe in Figure 1. Second, there is a
metallicity dependence of the radius expansion of stars in our single
star evolution tracks (Hurley et al. 2000), leading more stars to enter
the CE phase during the Hertzsprung Gap instead of during the giant
phase at higher (∼ Solar) metallicities (cf., Figure 2 in Belczynski
et al. 2010, Figure 7 in Linden et al. 2010 and Section 3.1.1 in Bavera
et al. 2021). In our fiducial simulation such Hertzsprung Gap donor
stars do not survive the CE phase. In models F (E+K) and K (optimistic CE) we instead assume these systems do survive, leading to a
visible boost in BBH yields at higher 𝑍, as seen in Figure 1.
The behavior of the BHNS yield in most models, on the other hand,
first modestly increases as a function of 𝑍 and then declines around
Z (Figure 1; cf., Klencki et al. 2018; Chruślińska & Nelemans
2019; Román-Garza et al. 2021). This causes the yield to broadly
peak in the range 0.2 Z . Z . Z , where the location of the peak
varies between models as shown in Figure 1. The same metallicity
dependent effects as described for BHBH mergers above are at play
for BHNS mergers. However, since BHNS systems typically already
form DCOs with lower mass BHs and form from lower mass stars
compared to BHBH mergers, these BHNS systems do not experience
the same boost in formation yields at low metallicities compared to
the BHBH mergers, leading to lower yields at lower 𝑍. In addition,
the peak in BHNS yield is caused by the maximum radial extent
of stars in the Hertzsprung Gap, which generally increases with 𝑍
but decreases between 10−3 . 𝑍 . 10−2 in our simulations for the
zero-age main sequence mass range of BHNS progenitors (initial
primary masses of 15 . 𝑚 1,i / M . 50). This is based on the single
star evolution prescriptions from Hurley et al. (2000) implemented
in COMPAS. As a result of the smaller radii there are typically fewer
stellar mergers in our simulations as fewer stars completely engulf
their companion during mass transfer (as discussed by Giacobbo &
Mapelli 2018) and the average initial separations of binaries that form
merging BHNSs shifts to smaller values, which are more commonly

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes

5

Figure 1. Formation yield of merging double compact objects per solar mass of star formation, R form = d𝑁form /d𝑀SFR (Equation 1), as a function of birth
metallicity 𝑍 . The yield only includes binaries that have GW-driven inspiral times . 14 Gyr. From top to bottom the panels show the formation yields for
merging BHBH, BHNS and NSNS, respectively. Each color and marker type correspond to one of the 20 binary population synthesis models explored in this
study (Table 1). The dark and light gray areas in the background mark where the formation yield is larger and smaller compared to our fiducial model (A) yield.
Vertical dotted lines show fixed 𝑍 values to guide the reader. The marker points show the 𝑍 grid values that we simulated with COMPAS in each simulation. The
sharp increase in yield around 𝑍 ≈ 0.0105, particularly visible in the NSNS panel, is caused by an artificial bifurcation in our 𝜆 values for the common-envelope
treatment in COMPAS at this 𝑍 . The scatter in the unstable case BB mass transfer model (E) in the NSNS panel is caused by sampling noise. H Y

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

6

Broekgaarden et al.

formed. See also the discussion in §4.1.2 in Klencki et al. (2018) for
additional details.
We find that the NSNS merger yield remains roughly constant as
a function of 𝑍 (cf., Chruślińska et al. 2018; Klencki et al. 2018;
Giacobbo & Mapelli 2018; Neĳssel et al. 2019) as the metallicitydependent effects described above are less significant for lower-mass
stars that form NSNS binaries. The strong increase in formation
yield around 𝑍 ≈ 0.0105 in Figure 1 that is particularly noticeable
for NSNS binaries is due to a bifurcation in our 𝜆 prescription for the
envelope binding energy (relevant for the CE phase) and is an artifact in our modelling. More orbital energy is needed to successfully
unbind the envelope for 𝑍 > 0.0105 in our models. This means that
the binary engulfed in the CE will need to move to tighter orbits in
order to successfully eject the envelope. This results in tighter postCE binaries that survive the second SN and can merge in a Hubble
time, thereby increasing the rate. Finally, we note that the scatter in
model E (unstable case BB) is caused by sampling noise as a consequence of the very small number of NSNS mergers (only 371) in
this simulation6 . In the next Section we discuss this model and show
that it under-predicts the inferred NSNS rate from GW observations
by two orders of magnitude.
Comparing the panels in Figure 1 we find that at low 𝑍 the formation yield of merging BHBHs in a Hubble time exceeds that of
merging BHNSs and NSNSs. The merging BHNS formation yield
starts dominating over the BHBH yield at 𝑍 & 0.3 Z , whereas for
merging NSNS this occurs at 𝑍 & 0.5 Z for most models. We show
these merging DCO ratios in Figure A1. Using our S(𝑍, 𝑧) models we can translate these transition metallicities into approximate
typical redshifts. For example, Figure A2 shows that the average
metallicity of star formation is h𝑍i ≈ 0.5 Z at 𝑧 ≈ 3 and 𝑧 ≈ 0.4 for
the xyz = 312 and xyz = 231 S(𝑍, 𝑧) models, respectively. These
two S(𝑍, 𝑧) models correspond to the highest and lowest average
metallicity of star formation within our simulated S(𝑍, 𝑧) models
and, as we will show in the next section, to one of the lowest and
highest DCO merger rate density predictions, respectively.

3.2 Intrinsic merger rates
In Figure 2 we show the population synthesis calculated local (intrinsic) merger rate densities for BHBH, BHNS and NSNS binaries.
There are three main findings that we describe in more detail below.
First, we find that the combined variations in our massive binary star
and S(𝑍, 𝑧) assumptions impact the intrinsic DCO rates with resulting ranges of ≈ 210−1030. Second, only a subset of the 560 models
matches the ranges for the inferred BHBH, BHNS and NSNS merger
rate density from GW observations (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. 2021c). Third, we find that the calculated merger rates
for different types of DCO are sensitive to different uncertainties in
the modelling. Most strikingly, we find that the BHBH merger rates
are primarily sensitive to variations in S(𝑍, 𝑧) models, whereas the
NSNS merger rates are predominantly impacted by binary stellar
evolution model variations. This means that the observed BHBH and
NSNS rates can provide a test-bed for S(𝑍, 𝑧) and stellar evolution
uncertainties, respectively.
The intrinsic rates are calculated using the formation yields from
Equation 1 and by taking into account the S(𝑍, 𝑧) weighting discussed in §2.2. The local merger rate is then obtained using 𝑡 m (𝑧 ≈ 0)
in the equation (i.e. evaluating the equation at the center of our lowest

6

See our online table H.

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

redshift bin for 𝑧)
R m (𝑡 m ) =
∫

d2 𝑁merger
(𝑡 m ) =
d𝑡m d𝑉c

∫ 𝑡m
d𝑡delay S(𝑍, 𝑡form )

d𝑍
0

d2 𝑁form
(𝑍, 𝑡delay ),
d𝑀SFR d𝑡delay

(2)

where 𝑡m again is time in the source frame measured from the Big
Bang7 , 𝑡m is the time of the DCO merger, 𝑡 delay is the delay time
between the formation of the DCO and its merger, and 𝑉c is the
co-moving volume. The delay time is 𝑡 delay = 𝑡 evolve + 𝑡 inspiral , the
total time from the onset of hydrogen burning at ZAMS to forming
a DCO, i.e., until the second SN (𝑡evolve ), and the time it takes the
DCO to coalesce from the moment of the second SN (𝑡 inspiral ); see
Figure 1 in Paper I for more details. The binary initially forms at
𝑡 form , which we set as 𝑡form = 𝑡 m − 𝑡 delay in this equation. For the
S(𝑍, 𝑧) we use the 28 models from Table A1. In practice we estimate
Equation 2 with a Riemann sum where we sum over our metallicity
grid and redshift (time) bins.
To quantify the scatter in the predicted intrinsic rates we calculate
the mean of the ratios between the maximum and minimum predicted
rates given by
h𝜎𝜇 i =

0
0
xyz=333
, ..., R m,Txyz
)
∑︁ max(R m,Axyz
,
0
0
xyz=000 min(R m,Axyz , ..., R m,Txyz )

(3)

0
0
𝜇=𝑇
1 ∑︁ max(R m,𝜇000 , ..., R m,𝜇333 )
,
20
min(R 0
, ..., R 0
)

(4)

1
28

and
h𝜎xyz i =

𝜇=𝐴

m,𝜇000

m,𝜇333

0 = R (𝑡 (𝑧 ≈ 0)) and
where we used the short-hand notation R m
m m
𝜇 and xyz are the stellar evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧) labels, respectively.
Intuitively, Equation 3 represents the uncertainty range from stellar
evolution as averaged over the S(𝑍, 𝑧) models, whereas Equation 4
represents the uncertainty range from S(𝑍, 𝑧) as averaged over the
stellar evolution models. Large (small) values for 𝜎𝜇 and 𝜎xyz correspond to large (small) impacts by binary star evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧)
variations, respectively.

3.2.1 BHBH merger rates
We find that the intrinsic merging BHBH rates are predicted to lie in
0,BHBH
the range R m
≈ 3.8−810 Gpc−3 yr−1 as shown in the top panel
in Figure 2. The combined uncertainty thus impacts the predicted
rates with a factor of up to8 ≈ 210. We find that the variations
in stellar and binary evolution impact the BHBH rate on average
with h𝜎𝜇 i ≈ 6, while variations in our S(𝑍, 𝑧) models impact the
predicted BHBH rate with uncertainties of h𝜎xyz i ≈ 20.
We find that the majority of our stellar and binary evolution model
variations do not impact the BHBH rate with more than a factor ≈ 2,
as can be seen in the top panel of Figure 2 when comparing the
predicted rates with our fiducial model. Model T ( 𝑓WR = 5) has the
highest impact on the rates. The other largest BHBH rate changes are
7

Where we use the WMAP9–cosmology from Astropy (Hinshaw et al.
2013). This assumption does not drastically impact our results.
8 This is the ratio between the minimum and maximum predicted rates quoted
with the error bar in the left of each panel in Figure 2. This is not the same
as multiplying h𝜎xyz i and h𝜎𝜇 i, as the latter are averages calculated using
Equations 3 and 4, and because the impacts from stellar evolution and S (𝑍 , 𝑧)
variations are not (fully) independent.

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes
ial
uc
fid

102

0.2

R0m,max = 810

5
β

=

0.5
β

=

le
5
tab B
0.7 uns e B
s
a
c

E

+

K

E
αC

=

Mass Transfer

0.1
E
αC

=

0.5
E
αC

=

2
E
αC

=

10

ic
ist
tim
op CE

S

id

p
ra

SN

N
xm
ma .0 M
2

102

P
no

N
IS

1D

s
H
σ rm −1
σ rm−1
v k,B−1
0.1
SN km s SN m s SN
s
=
m
k
0
k
0
0
0
1
3
f WR

Supernovae

f WR

=

5

Stellar Winds

R0m,min = 3.8

BHBH

hσµi ≈ 6×
hσxyzi ≈ 20×

BHNS

hσµi ≈ 69×
hσxyzi ≈ 8×

NSNS

hσµi ≈ 226×
hσxyzi ≈ 2×

R0m,max = 830

377×

R0m [Gpc−3 yr−1]

103

1D s

S

Common-Envelope

101

100

N
xm
ma . 0 M
3

212×

R0m [Gpc−3 yr−1]

103

β

=

7

101

10

0

R0m,max = 330

102
101

1034×

R0m [Gpc−3 yr−1]

103

R0m,min = 2.2

100

10−1

R0m,min = 0.32

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

R

S

T

binary population synthesis model µ

Figure 2. Intrinsic (local) merger rate densities for merging BHBHs (top panel), BHNSs (middle panel) and NSNSs (bottom panel) systems for our 560 model
variations. The rates are for merging DCOs at 𝑧 ≈ 0 calculated using Equation 2 (i.e., without applying GW detector selection effects). We show for each of
the 20 binary population synthesis models (Table 1) the merger rates for the 28 variations in S (𝑍 , 𝑧) (Table A1). We connect predictions that use the same
S (𝑍 , 𝑧) model with a line for visual reasons only. Two S (𝑍 , 𝑧) variations are highlighted corresponding to S (𝑍 , 𝑧) models resulting in one of the highest
(xyz=231, dashed) and lowest (xyz=312, dotted) merger rate predictions. The values h𝜎𝜇 i and h𝜎xyz i quote a proxy for the mean scatter (Equations 3 and 4) in
the predicted rates due to variations in binary population synthesis and S (𝑍 , 𝑧), respectively. The minimum and maximum rates and their ratio are quoted with
0 ≡ (d𝑁 2 /d𝑡 d𝑉 ) (𝑡 (𝑧 ≈ 0)). Shaded horizontal bars indicate the ranges spanned by the 90%
a black error bar on the left. We use the short-hand notation R m
s
c
m
det
0,BHBH
credible intervals for the intrinsic merger rates inferred from GW observations The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. (2021c): R m
= 16−130 Gpc−3
0,BHNS
0,NSNS
−3
−3
−1
−1
−1
yr (BHBH), R m
= 7.4−320 Gpc yr (BHNS) and R m
= 16−1900 Gpc yr (NSNS). Model realizations where all three of the BHBH,
BHNS and NSNS simulated merger rate densities overlap with the inferred ranges from observations are marked with red crosses. A video showing the rates for
each individual S (𝑍 , 𝑧) model is provided at https://youtu.be/LkT7FD1xC2g. Dashed horizontal lines indicate the range for the fiducial model (A). At the
top we added colored labels to indicate what physics assumptions are varied compared to our fiducial assumptions in the models. H Y

from stellar evolution models that change the CE assumptions (e.g.,
models F, G and K).
The 90% credible intervals from the GW inferred rate of merging
BHBH = 16−130 Gpc−3 yr−1 based on the GWTCBHBHs spans R m
3 catalog from The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. (2021c)9 .
Figure 2 shows that only a subset of our S(𝑍, 𝑧) models (lower lines
in the top panel) predict merging BHBH rates that are consistent with
this range. The S(𝑍, 𝑧) realizations that typically over-predict the observed BHBH rate for all stellar evolution models are the ones with an
implementation of the Langer & Norman (2006) MZR (z = 1). This
MZR model corresponds to the lowest average 𝑍 among our MZR
variations (right panel, Figure A2), which significantly increases the
9

From hereon we quote the rate range from the ‘merged’ row in Table II in
The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. (2021c) that represents the union of
90% credible intervals from their PDB, MS and BGP models.

BHBH yield. The over-prediction is even more significant if other
formation channels than the isolated binary evolution channel further contribute to the observed BHBH rate (e.g., Abbott et al. 2021b;
Zevin et al. 2021).
3.2.2 BHNS merger rates
0,BHNS
For the merging BHNS systems we find rates in the range R m
≈
−3
−1
2.2−830 Gpc yr as shown in the middle panel of Figure 2. Our
combined model variations impact the predicted BHNS rates with
an uncertainty factor of up to ≈ 377. We find that variations in the
rate are typically h𝜎𝜇 i ≈ 69 for binary evolution variations, while
the impact from S(𝑍, 𝑧) variations typically leads to a range of
h𝜎𝑥 𝑦𝑧 i ≈ 8.
Almost all predicted BHNS rates are consistent with the range
0,BHNS
Rm
= 7.4−320 Gpc−3 yr−1 spanned by the 90% credible in-

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

8

Broekgaarden et al.

tervals from observations (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al.
2021c). The exceptions are a few of the S(𝑍, 𝑧) models in combination with models D, E and G that under-predict the BHNS rate
and a few of the S(𝑍, 𝑧) models with 𝑧 = 1 in combination with
stellar evolution model P, Q and R (lower SN kicks), which slightly
over-predict the observed upper limit. The latter models have reduced
SNe kicks, which increases the fraction of systems that stay bound
during the SN compared to our fiducial model (see Paper I for a
more detailed discussion). Future improved constraints might enable
ruling out models.

3.2.3 NSNS merger rates
The bottom panel in Figure 2 shows our predicted merging NSNS
0,NSNS
≈ 0.32−330 Gpc−3 yr−1 .
rates. We find values in the range R m
Combined, our 560 model realizations impact the estimated NSNS
rates up to a factor of ≈ 1030. The uncertainty from stellar and
binary evolution dominates the scatter in the calculated NSNS rates
(cf., Santoliquido et al. 2021), impacting the rate by h𝜎𝜇 i ≈ 226
compared to h𝜎xyz i ≈ 2 when varying the S(𝑍, 𝑧).
All of our calculated NSNS merger rates except those involving model E match the observed merger rate density range of
0,NSNS
Rm
= 16−1900 Gpc−3 yr−1 (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. 2021c), although the majority of rates fall in the lower
end of the observed NSNS merger rate range. Models I, J, P and Q
have the highest predicted NSNS merger rate densities as the NSNS
rate is boosted in these models. For example, in models I and J fewer
binaries merge during the CE phase compared to the fiducial model.
In models P and Q the smaller value for the root-mean-square velocity dispersion reduces the kick velocities that decreases the number
of binaries that disrupts during the SN. Only model E is in particular
an outlier in the predicted NSNSs merger rate. In this channel the
formation yield of merging NSNSs is extremely low (Figure 1). This
is because the majority of systems leading to merging NSNSs experience a case BB mass transfer phase that ultra-strips the NS progenitor
(Dewi & Pols 2003; Tauris et al. 2017). In our model variation E we
assume this phase of mass transfer to be unstable, leading to a stellar
merger in combination with our pessimistic CE assumption. Indeed,
in model F where we have the same settings as in model E but add the
‘optimistic’ CE assumptions, we obtain NSNS rates consistent with
our fiducial model. If we exclude model E we find instead h𝜎𝜇 i ≈ 10
(while h𝜎xyz i remains unchanged).
3.2.4 Trends with stellar evolution variations
There are a few trends visible in the rates in Figure 2. First, the predicted BHNS rate declines with increasing mass transfer efficiency,
𝛽 (models B, C and D). The increase in 𝛽 leads the secondary to
accrete more mass during the first stable mass transfer phase, resulting in more massive secondaries and typically larger separations
because the mass transfer is more conservative. The larger masses
and/or larger separations at higher 𝛽 values results in more binaries
eventually disrupting during a SN, merging during the CE phase,
and/or forming a BHBH binary instead of a BHNS (cf., Kruckow
et al. 2018). In addition, this also impacts 𝑡 inspiral in a complex way
due to the interplay of the typically larger separation after the first
stable mass transfer phase, as well as more orbital shrinking during
the CE phase because the star has to eject a more massive envelope.
The BHBH and NSNS rates instead increase with increasing values
for 𝛽. This different behavior comes from a non-trivial combination of
ways in which the formation pathways of binaries leading to merging
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

BHNSs are different from merging BHBHs and NSNSs and how
changing 𝛽 impacts this. An example is that the impact from 𝛽
on the evolution of the binary is connected with the mass ratios
of the binary (e.g. the mass ratio impacts the size of the Roche
lobes, whether the mass transfer is stable or unstable and whether
the mass transfer causes the binary orbit to widen or shrink). The
merging BHBH and NSNS populations are DCOs with more equal
(i.e. 𝑞 ∼ 1) mass ratio distributions compared to BHNS (see also
§3.4). The binaries that form merging BHBHs and NSNSs originate
thus from different mass ratio populations at the same evolutionary
stages compared to merging BHNSs. This results in the 𝛽 parameter
impacting the populations differently. Another difference is that the
merging BHNS typically form from different formation channels
within isolated binary evolution compared to BHBH and NSNS. For
example, in our fiducial model (A) a substantial fraction (& 25% of
all merging BHBHs in our simulation) of the BHBHs form through
only stable mass transfer episodes, without engaging a CE, whereas
for BHNSs this is much smaller (. 5%). The parameter 𝛽 has a
different impact on each of these formation channels.
Second, the BHNS rate increases with increasing values for 𝛼
(models G, H, I and J) as a result of more efficient ejection of the
CE. This causes typically fewer systems to merge during the CE (cf.,
Kruckow et al. 2018, Figure 17). On the other hand, the rates slightly
decline for the highest 𝛼CE values as in this case binaries do not
shrink enough to merge in a Hubble time (see also the discussion on
𝛼 in §3.1.1 from Bavera et al. 2021).

3.3 GW detectable merger rates
The top panel in Figure 3 shows the predicted detectable merger
rates for our 560 model variations. These are calculated by volume
integrating Equation 2 and taking into account the sensitivity of a
GW detector, quantified by the probability 𝑃det of observing a merging binary of specified masses at a given redshift and corresponding
distance. Here we assume a detector sensitivity comparable to Advanced LIGO in its design configuration (hereafter, design sensitivity; LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. 2015; Abbott et al. 2020a).
We follow Barrett et al. (2018) and choose a detector signal-to-noise
ratio threshold of 8 as a proxy for detectability by a GW detector
network (e.g., LVK). The detectable merger rate is given by:
R det (𝑡 det , 𝑚 1 , 𝑚 2 ) =
∫
d𝑉c

d3 𝑁det
=
d𝑡 det d𝑚 1 d𝑚 2

d4 𝑁merger
d𝑡m
𝑃 (𝑚 , 𝑚 , 𝑧),
d𝑡 det d𝑡 m d𝑉c d𝑚 1 d𝑚 2 det 1 2

(5)

where 𝑡det is the time in the detector (i.e., the observer) frame, and
𝑚 1 and 𝑚 2 are the component masses of the DCO in the source frame
(see Paper I for further details).
Considering the 560 model variations we find predicted detected rates for an LVK detector network at design sensitivity in
BHBH ≈ 17−12000 yr−1 , R BHNS ≈ 0.36−180 yr−1 and
the range R det
det
NSNS
R det ≈ 0−12 yr−1 , as shown in the top panel of Figure 3. We find
that the stellar, binary, and cosmic evolution combined impact the
predicted detectable merger rates by factors of up to ≈ 500−1300.
This is slightly higher compared to the intrinsic rates as the detectable
population is biased to higher masses, where our simulations are relatively more sensitive to stellar evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧) assumptions.

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes
c
du

ial

fi

β

=

0.2

5
β

=

0.5
β

=

9

ic
1D s
S
1D
H
le
NS
ist
σ rms−1 σ rm−s 1
mN
v k,B−1
5
tab B
0.1
0.5
2
10 im
N
xm
0.1
5
SN ax M
K
IS SN km SN m s SN m s
0 . 7 uns e B
=
=
=
= opt CE
=
=
m .0
ma .0 M
id
P
k
0
s
+
E
E
E
E
p
2
3
0k
ca
E
αC
αC
αC
αC
ra
no
10
30
f WR
f WR

105

690×

180

101

12

100

10−1

1266×

102

499×

10−2

0.0092

0.36

NSNS

100

BHNS

10−5

102
101

0.04

896×

Rdet/RBHBH
det

5978×

10−4

> 1 detection per 72 BHBHs

0.35

10−2
10−3

BHNS

17

100
10−1

0.00039

10−2

A

10−3

NSNS

0.000007

B

C

D

E

F

G

H
I
J
K
L
M
binary population synthesis model µ

N

O

P

Q

R

S

Rate per 72 BH-BH mergers

Rdet [yr−1]

103

10−1

BHBH

12000

104

T

Figure 3. Top panel: The calculated detectable merger rates for merging BHBH (blue), BHNS (green) and NSNS (orange) for a GW network at design sensitivity
for our 560 models. Bottom panel: The predicted merging BHNS and NSNS detectable rate ratios over merging BHBH. On the right axes we scale the ratios
to the 72 BHBH detections with false-alarm rate . 1 yr−1 from the GWTC-3 (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. 2021c). Both panels: The layout, lines
and symbols are as in Figure 2. We note that the relative rates could be slightly, but not significantly, different at O1-O2-O3 (GWTC-3) sensitivity compared to
design sensitivity. H Y

3.3.1 Relative merger rates
The bottom panel of Figure 3 shows the relative merger rates between
the different DCO channels for LVK at design sensitivity. We find
that almost all of our models predict a higher BHNS detection rate
compared to the NSNS detection rate, except for model D (which has
a mass transfer efficiency of 𝛽 = 0.75) and model G (which assumes
𝛼CE = 0.1) in which a subset of the S(𝑍, 𝑧) models lead to higher
NSNS detection rates. The higher BHNS rate is a result from both the
high intrinsic yield of BHNS mergers compared to NSNS mergers
(Figure 1) and the larger detection volume for BHNS compared to
NSNS mergers as a result from their larger masses (§3.4).

3.4 GW detectable mass distribution functions
The uncertainties in stellar and binary evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧) also
impact the shapes of the mass distributions of detectable DCO
mergers, in addition to the overall merger rate densities. We show
this in Figures 4 (BHBH), 5 (BHNS) and 6 (NSNS) for our 560
model realizations. Each Figure shows the normalized distributions for the DCO component masses 𝑚 1 and 𝑚 2 , chirp mass
Mc = (𝑚 1 𝑚 2 ) 3/5 /(𝑚 1 + 𝑚 2 ) 1/5 , and mass ratio 𝑞 = 𝑚 1 /𝑚 2 , where
we use subscripts ‘1’ and ‘2’ to indicate the more massive and less
massive component in the double compact object system, respectively. To compare the shapes we show kernel density distributions
for the chirp mass and summary statistics (i.e., median, 50, 90 and
99 distribution percentiles) for the individual masses, chirp mass and
mass ratio for the BHBH, BHNS and NSNS mergers. All distributions are weighted for the detection volume and sensitivity of LVK
at design sensitivity using Equation 5 and given by the differential

detectable merger rate d2 𝑁det /d𝑡 det d𝑥, with 𝑥 being one of the mass
parameters mentioned above.10
3.4.1 Impact from binary star and cosmic evolution on the
distribution shapes
We qualitatively compare the impact on the shape of the detectable
mass distributions from variations in stellar and binary evolution and
variations in S(𝑍, 𝑧) by analyzing how the distributions (and distribution statistics) vary; see Figures 4, 5 and 6. Distributions that
are similar between vertical panels (different colors) indicate that
changes in stellar and binary evolution assumptions do not significantly impact the distribution shape. On the other hand, distributions
that are similar between variations plotted within one sub-panel indicate these S(𝑍, 𝑧) realizations do not significantly impact the shape
of the distributions. By comparing these two effects directly we can
qualitatively analyze which of the two uncertainties dominates the
shape of the detectable mass distributions.
For merging BHBH systems we find that the uncertainty in the
shape of the mass distribution is significantly impacted by both variations in stellar evolution and the S(𝑍, 𝑧). The impact from the S(𝑍, 𝑧)
reflects the metallicity dependence of BHBH formation (§3.1), which
also strongly impacts the resulting BH masses (cf., Belczynski et al.
2010; Giacobbo & Mapelli 2018). For example, the peak in the detectable BHBH chirp mass distribution around 30–35 M that is
visible in the majority of models in Figure 4 disappears in a small
subset of the S(𝑍, 𝑧) models. These are the S(𝑍, 𝑧) models with the
Panter et al. (2004) GSMF and Ma et al. (2016) MZR (xyz =113,
10

From hereon we will use the short notation dR det /d𝑥 for this differential
detection rate that describes the ‘shape’ of the distributions.
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

10

Broekgaarden et al.

Figure 4. Shape of the detectable mass distribution functions for BHBH mergers from our 560 model realizations. First column: the probability distribution
functions of the chirp mass Mc at the time of merger. The distributions are normalized within each panel and given by dR det /d𝑥 = (d2 𝑁det /d𝑡det d𝑥) for
parameter 𝑥 (A variation of Equation 5). Other columns: From left to right we show the chirp mass, the primary (most massive) and secondary (least massive)
BH mass, and the mass ratio. In each sub-panel we show 28 individual horizontal bars that visualize the median (scatter points) and the 50%, 90% and 99%
(three shades) distribution intervals. A zoom-in that shows the order of the S (𝑍 , 𝑧) models is given in Figure A3. Rows: From top to bottom, the panels/colors
show the 20 different stellar evolution simulations from Table 1. Within each sub-panel we show the 28 S (𝑍 , 𝑧) models with different lines (first column) or
horizontal bars (other columns). H Y

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes

11

Figure 5. Same as Figure 4 for detectable BHNS mergers. For the individual masses we show the BH (𝑚BH ) and NS (𝑚NS ) masses. H Y

213 and 313), which correspond to realizations with high average
metallicities compared to the other S(𝑍, 𝑧) models (see Figure B1 in
Paper I) and lead to fewer massive BHBH mergers. The stellar and
binary evolution variation that impacts the mass distributions most
drastically is the model in which we assume pair-instability SNe do
not occur (model O), leading to the formation of BHs with masses

& 40 M . This model assumption may be unrealistic (e.g., Woosley
2017; Farmer et al. 2019). Other significant changes, best visible
in the kernel density functions (left-most column in Figure 4), are
present for models K (optimistic CE), L (rapid SN remnant model)
and T ( 𝑓WR = 0.1), where, for example, the chirp mass peaks shift,
disappear or are created compared to the fiducial model A (e.g., in

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

12

Broekgaarden et al.

Figure 6. Same as Figure 4 for detectable NSNS mergers. For the individual masses we show the primary (most massive, 𝑚NS,1 ) and secondary (least massive,
𝑚NS,2 ) NS mass. The shape of model E (unstable case BB) suffers significantly from sampling noise due to the low number of NSNS systems in this variation.
HY

the ‘optimistic CE’ model due to the many additional BHBH systems
added around lower chirp masses).
For merging BHNS systems, on the other hand, the distribution
shapes are predominantly impacted by the stellar and binary evolution model variations compared to the S(𝑍, 𝑧) variations (Figure 5).
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

Primary effects include models E (unstable case BB), L (rapid SN),
M (max 𝑚 NS = 2 M ) and N (max 𝑚 NS = 3 M ), where the median and distribution percentiles are visibly different compared to the
fiducial model A. Our S(𝑍, 𝑧) variations do not significantly impact

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes
the distribution shapes (i.e. changing dR det /d𝑥 more than a factor 2)
for most of the models except model B, G and H.
For NSNS systems the shape of the normalized mass distributions
are impacted by both sets of variations (Figure 6). Among the binary
stellar evolution variations, the models that impact the shape of the
distribution significantly are realizations that change the SN remnant
mass or kick velocity, and/or the CE efficiency (models G, H, I, J, K,
L, M, N, P and Q). The distributions from model E (unstable case
BB mass transfer) are dominated by sampling noise as a result of the
low NSNS yield in this model (§3.1). For the S(𝑍, 𝑧) particularly
all our models with the Langer & Norman (2006) MZR model (z =
1) significantly impact the NSNS mass distributions, shifting the
distributions to higher median masses in the panels of Figure 6.
In summary, we find that for BHNSs, the variations in the distribution shapes are typically dominated by stellar and binary evolution
assumptions, suggesting that observations of BHNS systems could
aid in constraining stellar evolution models. For merging BHBH and
NSNS the distribution shapes are impacted by both sets of variations
(Figures 4 and 6). We therefore argue that constraining stellar evolution or S(𝑍, 𝑧) models solely from the distribution shapes of merging
BHBHs or NSNSs may be challenging. We discuss this further in §4.
3.4.2 Distribution properties considering all model realizations
In the previous section we showed that the model uncertainties in
binary and stellar evolution, and S(𝑍, 𝑧) can significantly impact
the shapes of the DCO mass distributions. Here we instead discuss
several specific examples of features in the mass distributions in
Figures 4, 5 and 6 that are robust across all 560 model variations
explored in this work.
• First, in all 560 model variations 95% (99%) of the detectable
BHBH mergers have mass ratios 𝑞 . 4 (𝑞 . 6) (right-most column in Figure 4). The BHBH distribution medians and percentiles
furthermore indicate that in all model variations BHBHs from isolated binary evolution prefer order unity mass ratios. Detecting a
significant fraction (& 5%) of BHBH mergers with large mass ratios (𝑞 & 5) would point to other formation pathways or missing
physics in our simulations. This is consistent with the 72 BHBH detections announced by LVK with a false alarm rate < 1 yr−1 , which
most of are inferred to have mass ratios consistent with unity (The
LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. 2021b). However, the BHBH
+0.12 ; Abbott et al. 2020b) and the
merger GW190412 (1/𝑞 = 0.28−0.07
BHBH merger candidate GW190814 (1/𝑞 = 0.112+0.008
; Abbott
−0.009
et al. 2020d), if common, could hint to the existence of a population
with more extreme mass ratios (see also Arca Sedda 2021; Lu et al.
2021; Zevin et al. 2020a, and references therein).
• Second, & 95% of all BHBH mergers are expected to contain
a BH with & 8 M in all 560 model variations (third column of
Figure 4). This is not the case for BHs in BHNS systems where
typically & 25% of the detectable mergers are expected to contain
a BH of . 8 M (Figure 5). Our models predict the secondary BH
in the population of detected BHBH mergers to also commonly be
massive (& 8 M ), although many of our models do allow for at
least & 25% of the BHBH mergers to contain a secondary BH with
. 10 M . For the currently reported BHBH detections by LVK with
a false alarm rate < 1 yr−1 (but even for those with a false alarm
rate < 0.25 yr−1 ) all of the inferred medians of the primary BH mass
have BH masses 𝑚 BH,1 & 8 M (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration
et al. 2021c, Table I), consistent with our models.
• Third, in all 560 model variations . 5% of the detectable merging BHNS systems have BH masses 𝑚 BH & 18 M (third column

13

of Figure 5). As discussed in Paper I, this is due to the fact that
more equal mass stars more readily survive important stellar evolution phases in the formation pathways to BHNS mergers; to form a
BHNS one of the stars needs to be of sufficiently low mass to form
a NS, leading to a preference for the other star to also be of lower
mass than is typical in BHBH. Consequently, we find that in all our
560 model realizations . 5% of BHNS mergers have chirp masses
of & 5.5 M . This suggests that detecting a BHNS merger with a BH
mass 𝑚 BH & 18 M could indicate that the system did not form from
isolated binary evolution processes our models include, but instead
from chemically homogeneous evolution and/or dynamical formation where such high BH masses are more commonly expected (e.g.,
Marchant et al. 2017; McKernan et al. 2020; Rastello et al. 2020).
The two detected BHNS systems with a false alarm rate < 1 yr−1 ,
GW200105 and GW200115, have Mc . 3.5 M (at the 90% credible interval) (Abbott et al. 2021c) consistent with our models (see
also Broekgaarden & Berger 2021; Broekgaarden et al. 2021).
• Fourth, we find that in all 560 model variations the NSs in detectable NSNS mergers typically have lower NS masses compared
to those in detectable BHNS mergers (Figures 5 and 6). We find this
is true for both NS components in the NSNS mergers. This is again
due to the preferrence for equal mass binaries to survive important
evolutionary phases leading to BHNS formation, thereby favoring
more massive pre-NS stars to form a BHNS system (see Paper I for
more details). To date two NSNS and BHNS detections have been
announced by LVK with a false alarm rate < 1 yr−1 (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. 2021c). For the NSNS detections the NS
masses are 𝑚 NS,1 = 1.46+0.12
and 𝑚 NS,2 = 1.27+0.09
(GW170817;
−0.10
−0.09
+0.3
Abbott et al. 2017) and 𝑚 NS,1 = 2.0+0.6
and
𝑚
NS,2 = 1.4−0.3
−0.3
(GW190425; Abbott et al. 2020c), which may indicate a NSNS mass
distribution that is not consistent with Galactic NSNS observations
(e.g. Vigna-Gómez et al. 2018; The LIGO Scientific Collaboration
et al. 2021c). For the BHNS detections the NS masses were found
to be 𝑚 NS = 1.9+0.3
M (GW200105) and 𝑚 NS = 1.5+0.7
M
−0.2
−0.3
(GW200115) (Abbott et al. 2021c). More detections are needed to
calculate robust median NS masses in NSNS and BHNS detections.
Besides the four specific points above, more common trends
throughout our 560 model variations are visible in Figures 4, 5 and
6, particularly in the lower and upper bounds for the BH and NS
masses. Several of these trends, however, are direct results from the
remnant mass prescriptions used in our models. For example, all
models with the exception of model O (no PISN) predict that 90% of
the detected BHBH mergers have chirp masses in the range Mc ≈ 5–
35 M . The upper limit is set by the maximum possible BH masses
of ∼ 40 M allowed due to the implementation of pair-instability SN
in our models (e.g., Marchant et al. 2019; Stevenson et al. 2019);
in model O we do not implement pair-instability SNe, and find BH
masses up to about 80 M and BHBH chirp masses up to about
60 M . In addition, in most of our model realizations the majority
of NSs in NSNS mergers have masses of ≈ 1.3 M (consistent with
e.g., Tauris et al. 2017; Vigna-Gómez et al. 2018). This is because
many NSNS experience at least one electron-capture SN (ECSN),
which in COMPAS are mapped to a mass of 1.26 M (Timmes et al.
1996, Team COMPAS: J. Riley et al. 2021). In addition, many NSNS
mergers in our models originate from relatively low mass stars with
carbon-oxygen cores of . 2.5 M at the time of the SN, which in the
delayed SN remnant mass prescription are mapped to a fixed value of
𝑚 NS ≈ 1.28 M (Fryer et al. 2012). Combined, this results in a peak
of NSs masses at 𝑚 NS ≈ 1.3 M . Exceptions to this are the rapid
SN remnant mass model (model I) where these low mass stars are
instead mapped to NS masses of ≈ 1.1 M leading to a broader peak
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

14

Broekgaarden et al.

at ≈ 1.1 − 1.3 M . The lower and upper NS limits are also artificially
set in our models to ≈ 1 M and ≈ 2.5 M , respectively (cf., Fryer
et al. 2012), except in models M and N where we set the upper limit
to 2 M and 3 M , respectively.
3.5 Delay time and birth metallicity distributions
The uncertainties in the stellar evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧) prescriptions in
population synthesis modelling can also impact the expected delay
time (𝑡 delay ) and birth metallicity (𝑍) distributions of the detectable
DCO mergers. We show the impact from the 560 model realizations explored in this study in Figures 7, 8 and 9. We focus on
the 𝑡 delay and 𝑍 distributions as these properties can be (indirectly)
constrained from observations (e.g., Im et al. 2017; Safarzadeh et al.
2019; Fishbach & Kalogera 2021). In addition, these distributions
provide insights into the range of birth metallicities and star formation redshifts that current GW observations probe, which can be
informative for future modelling (e.g., help understand where to focus
computational time and which 𝑍 to simulate). We note that impacts
on the 𝑡 delay distribution also impact (indirectly) the distribution of
𝑍, because the birth metallicity distribution (d𝑃/d𝑍; §2.2) evolves
as a function of redshift.
The most striking feature of the 𝑡 delay and 𝑍 distributions is that
both are significantly impacted by the S(𝑍, 𝑧) variations for all three
DCO merger types. This is particularly discernible in the large scatter
of the distribution percentiles (see each sub-panel). We find that the
impact from S(𝑍, 𝑧) models is particularly significant for our variations in the choice of the metallicity probability function (d𝑃/d𝑍),
which describes the distribution of birth metallicities of stars at a
given redshift. This is because the birth metallicity strongly impacts
the properties and rate of the DCO mergers, including through the
metallicity-dependent formation yields, through mass loss that impact the DCO masses and can widen the orbit of the binary, and
through the metallicity-dependent radial expansion of stars, which
impacts mass transfer phases in our models (§3.1). In the convolution to obtain the detectable DCO mergers in Equation 5 all of these
properties impact the resulting population. Thus, the 𝑡delay and 𝑍 distributions of the detectable DCO mergers are significantly impacted
by the choice of (d𝑃/d𝑍) and S(𝑍, 𝑧).
Variations in the stellar and binary evolution assumptions can
also significantly impact the 𝑡 delay and 𝑍 distributions. For example,
model T ( 𝑓WR = 5), which increases the mass loss through stellar
winds, drastically suppresses the number of BHBH and BHNS events
that can form at higher metallicities (log(𝑍) & −2.5), thereby leading
to fewer of the detectable BHBH and BHNS mergers forming from
these metallicities (Figures 7 and 8). Another example is Model J
(𝛼CE = 10), which results in longer 𝑡 delay and lower 𝑍 compared to
our fiducial model in Figures 8 and 9. In model J orbital angular
momentum of the binary can much more efficiently be transformed
into ejecting the CE. This leads to less orbital shrinking during the
CE phase and longer inspiral times. As a result only BHNSs and
NSNSs that formed early in the Universe with low 𝑍 have had long
enough the time to inspiral and be detectable today. Model J does
not impact the BHBH distributions as significantly because most
detectable BHBH mergers in our simulations only go through stable
mass transfer phases (as these produce more massive BHBHs in our
simulations that the detectable population is biased to, cf. van Son
et al. 2021).
Overall, we find that the delay time distributions span a broad
range between a few Myr and the Hubble time with possible peaks
both at short (< 1 Gyr) and long (> 5 Gyr) delay times, reflecting
contributions from binaries born at lower and higher redshifts, reMNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

spectively. This is a result from the interplay between the S(𝑍, 𝑧)
being a function of redshift in combination with the DCO properties and formation efficiencies being 𝑍 dependent. We find that our
model variations indicate that the detectable BHBH mergers (Figure 7) probe systems with the longest median delay times, compared
to BHNS and NSNS mergers (Figures 8 and 9). However, exceptions
exist, including model J (𝛼CE = 10) where the median delay times of
detected BHNS and NSNS mergers are larger than those of BHBH
mergers for the reasons discussed above.
For the birth metallicity distribution shapes the right panels of
Figures 7, 8 and 9 show that the detectable DCO mergers arise from
a broad range of birth metallicities. As expected from the formation
yield efficiencies, BHBH mergers typically originate from the lowest
birth metallicities, with most of our models having a median log10 (𝑍)
of . −2.5, whereas the detectable BHNS and NSNS populations
originate in our models from higher 𝑍 with most models having
median log10 (𝑍) of & −2.5.

4 DISCUSSION
4.1 A realistic view of population synthesis models
In this paper we demonstrate the importance of considering the uncertainties in both massive star and binary evolution, as well as the
S(𝑍, 𝑧) when aiming to learn about the formation, evolution, and
mergers of binaries through a comparison of population synthesis
models to GW observations. Here we discuss the implications of our
results for interpreting population synthesis studies.
On the one hand, our findings provide a cautionary note for using
GW observations to uncover stellar and binary evolution properties.
Studies that draw conclusions by comparing population synthesis
results with GW observations without considering the wide range
of uncertainties in both stellar/binary evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧) assumptions could be drastically biased by the specific model realization that
is chosen to derive the results (cf. Belczynski et al. 2021; Bouffanais
et al. 2021). For example, studies including Zevin et al. (2017), Bouffanais et al. (2019), Franciolini et al. (2021), Ng et al. (2021) and
Zevin et al. (2021) aim to determine the contributions of different
formation channels to the observed BHBH population. Further examples include Fragione (2021), which estimates the number of BHNS
mergers with an electromagnetic counterpart. Our work shows that
uncertainties in both stellar and binary evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧) modelling can drastically impact the rate and distribution shapes of the
BHBH, BHNS and NSNS populations, challenging the ability to
draw strong conclusions when only considering a few population
synthesis models at this stage.
The situation is even more complex when considering that our
larger suite of models (560 realizations) still only represents a subset
of the overall uncertainties in population synthesis studies. For example, even our broader set of models does not account for uncertainties
in the stellar evolution tracks (e.g., Laplace et al. 2020; Agrawal et al.
2020), internal mixing (e.g., Schootemeĳer et al. 2019), stellar rotation (e.g., de Mink & Mandel 2016; Mapelli et al. 2020), the more
complex physics of the CE phase (e.g., Klencki et al. 2021; Ivanova
et al. 2020; Marchant et al. 2021; Olejak et al. 2021), the additional
possible remnant mass prescriptions (e.g. Dabrowny et al. 2021;
Mandel et al. 2021), the initial conditions of binary systems (e.g., de
Mink & Belczynski 2015; Moe & Di Stefano 2017; Klencki et al.
2018), and the possible contributions from other formation channels (e.g., Zevin et al. 2021). In addition, there are S(𝑍, 𝑧) model
variations that we did not explore, including alternative analytical

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes

15

Figure 7. The delay time 𝑡delay and birth metallicity 𝑍 distributions for detectable BHBH mergers for our 560 model realizations. The distributions and percentiles
are plotted as in Figure 4. The delay time is the time since formation of the binary system at the zero-age main sequence until the moment of merger. H Y

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

16

Broekgaarden et al.

Figure 8. Same as Figure 7 for detectable BHNS mergers. H Y

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes

17

Figure 9. Same as Figure 7 for detectable NSNS mergers. The shape of model E (unstable case BB) suffers significantly from sampling noise due to the low
number of NSNS systems in this variation (and similarly for model F). H Y

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

18

Broekgaarden et al.

prescriptions (e.g., Chruślińska et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2020), prescriptions derived from cosmological (zoom-in) simulations (e.g.,
FIRE, Illustris, EAGLE, Millennium; Lamberts et al. 2016; Mapelli
et al. 2017; du Buisson et al. 2020; Briel et al. 2021; Chu et al.
2021), and prescriptions inferred more directly from observations
(e.g., Chruślińska & Nelemans 2019; Chruślińska et al. 2021).
On the other hand, the fact that model predictions are sensitive
to the model assumptions also has positive consequences. As the
true DCO merger rates and properties become more constrained by
observations, then identifying which models are inconsistent with
reality aids in excluding some combinations of model assumptions,
and so helps to constrain stellar evolution and cosmic history. To do
this we need to sufficiently understand how the uncertainties in our
assumptions affect the model output. The results in this paper show
that simultaneously modelling the impact of uncertainties from stellar evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧) on the rates and distribution shapes of all
three DCO merger types can help. For example, in §3.2 we found that
the BHBH merger rate densities predicted from binary population
synthesis are relatively sensitive to S(𝑍, 𝑧) uncertainties and might
thereby present a good test bed to constrain S(𝑍, 𝑧) prescriptions.
Similarly, we found that the NSNS merger rate densities might be a
good test bed to constrain stellar evolution models. These findings are
in agreement with, and expand on, earlier work by Chruślińska et al.
(2019); Neĳssel et al. (2019); Tang et al. (2020); Santoliquido et al.
(2021). Simultaneously comparing the predictions for all three DCO
flavors can further aid in constraining models, as shown in Figure 2
for the merger rate densities. Another example is that we showed in
§3.4 that the BHNS distribution shapes might particularly be a good
test bed for stellar evolution models (Figure 5), whilst the shape of
the mass distributions of BHBH and NSNS detections are impacted
by both stellar evolution and our S(𝑍, 𝑧) model assumptions (Figure 4). We emphasize that understanding to which uncertainty these
different DCO observable properties are sensitive to also aids in understanding where to best spend computational time and work in the
simulations. We showed in §3.4.2 that some population synthesis
results are robust under our 560 model variations. These features
are important when identifying distinguishable characteristics of the
isolated binary evolution channel compared to other formation channels. Constraining and learning from population synthesis models
can be further aided in the future by additional constraints including
those from redshift dependent rates and redshift dependent distribution shapes (cf. Briel et al. 2021; Chu et al. 2021; Santoliquido
et al. 2021) and additional observational constraints including those
from electromagnetic observations of X-ray binaries (e.g., Belczynski et al. 2020; Vinciguerra et al. 2020), Galactic pulsar binaries
(e.g. Kruckow et al. 2018; Vigna-Gómez et al. 2018; Chattopadhyay
et al. 2020, 2021), short gamma-ray bursts (e.g. Mandhai et al. 2021;
Zevin et al. 2020b), or GW detections beyond LVK including Cosmic
Explorer and LISA (e.g. Shao & Li 2018; Ng et al. 2021; Wagg et al.
2021).

events The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. (2021c)11 . From
these detections, the LVK inferred local merger rate densities12 of
0,BHNS
0,BHBH
= 7.4−320 Gpc−3 yr−1 ,
= 16−130 Gpc−3 yr−1 , R m
Rm
0,NSNS
−3
−1
= 16−1900 Gpc yr (The LIGO Scientific Collaband R m
oration et al. 2021c). We showed in Figure 2 that the majority of our
560 model realizations match these inferred local merger rates. However, we also found that a subset of the S(𝑍, 𝑧) models overestimate
the BHBH merger rate, and that most of our models are at the lower
end of the NSNS merger rate. If we scale our predicted merger ratios
(Figure 3) to the 72 BHBH detections, we find a predicted range of
0−25 BHNS and 0−3 NSNS detections. Although these simulation
ranges encompass the DCO numbers found in the GWTC-3 catalog,
the majority of models seem to particularly underestimate the number
of NSNS mergers. This is consistent with findings by other studies
on isolated binary evolution populations (e.g., Giacobbo & Mapelli
2018; Chruślińska et al. 2018; Santoliquido et al. 2021), which indicated that matching the observed NSNS rate might require higher
values for 𝛼CE and/or smaller SN natal kicks. The NSNS rates could
also relatively increase by changes in the mass transfer stability prescriptions (𝜁) and envelope binding energy models (𝜆), which are
not explored in our study (see Han et al. 2020; Lau et al. 2021, and
references therein). Future observations and simulations can further
constrain this.
Beyond the merger rates, GWTC-3 also provides the inferred mass
distributions of the detected BHBH mergers. In Figure 10 we provide
a comparison between the inferred BHBH chirp mass distribution
and our set of simulations. We find that the majority of our models
predict chirp mass distributions that are largely consistent with the
inferred chirp mass distribution (and individual posterior distributions) for Mc . 35 M . Figure 10 shows that particularly the SN
remnant mass model variations (model L, M, N and O) significantly
impact the lower and higher chirp mass end of the distributions in
this comparison. On the other hand, we find that most of model realizations do not match the several detected BHBH mergers with
chirp masses & 35 M . Examples include GW190521 with Mc =
69.2+17.0
M , GW190602 with Mc = 49.1+9.1
M , GW190620
−10.6
−8.5
+5.4 M and
with Mc = 38.3+8.3
M
,
GW190701
with
M
=
40.3−4.9
c
−6.5
+10.0
GW190706 with Mc = 42.7−7.0 M , which all have at least one
component with an inferred median BH mass of 𝑚 BH,1 & 42 M ,
which is our implemented (pulsational) pair-instability SN BH mass
limit. Moreover, even in model O, the model in which we assume that pair-instability SN do not occur, we find that 95%(99%)
of the detectable BHBH chirp masses are expected to be below
. 50(. 60) M (Figure 4), making it challenging to explain the
inferred BH mass in GW190521 and the higher mass range of the
chirp mass distribution as shown in Figure 10. The origin of these
massive BHs systems is still under debate. One possibility is that the
location of the pair-instability mass gap could be shifted to higher
masses (e.g. Spera & Mapelli 2017; Farmer et al. 2019, 2020; Costa
et al. 2021; Mehta et al. 2021; Woosley & Heger 2021). Another
possibility is that BHBH mergers with massive BHs formed through
channels other than the isolated binary evolution channel. For example, Tanikawa et al. (2021) showed that formation from population
III stars can account for the missing high mass BHBH mergers in
isolated binary evolution studies like ours that only model population I and II stars. Other formation channels have also been suggested

4.2 Comparison with GW mergers
At the time of writing the LVK collaboration published the latest GW
catalog (GWTC-3; The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. 2021b)
containing a total of 76 events with a false alarm rate of . 1 yr−1 ,
consisting of 72 BHBH mergers, 2 NSNS mergers and 2 BHNS
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

11

We follow the most likely classification as reported in The LIGO Scientific
Collaboration et al. (2021c). This includes classifying GW190814 as a BHBH
event.
12 Assuming a merger rate constant in redshift.

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes

19

Figure 10. Differential detectable merger rate as a function of chirp mass Mc dR det /dMc . Colored distributions show the expected distribution from our
simulations. The gray filled distribution shows the 90% interval and median (black line) for the distribution inferred from observations, and in the background the
posterior sample distributions for individual BHBH-events are shown (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. 2021c, see Figure 2). All chirp mass distributions
are normalized. H Y

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

20

Broekgaarden et al.

Figure 10. Continuation of Figure 10. H

for these massive BHBH mergers including hierarchical dynamical
mergers (e.g. Rodriguez et al. 2015, 2016; Anagnostou et al. 2020),
stellar mergers (e.g. Spera et al. 2019; Di Carlo et al. 2020; Kremer
et al. 2020), triples (e.g. Vigna-Gómez et al. 2021) or mergers in
AGN disks (e.g. Secunda et al. 2020). For a more detailed discussion
see, for example, Abbott et al. (2020e) and Kimball et al. (2021) and
references therein. Future studies should explore a full comparison
with LVK data to further constrain models.

assumptions (see Figure 1).
• Merging DCO rates: We find that the calculated intrinsic and
0 and R , respectively) can be
detectable merger rate densities (R m
det
impacted by factors ≈ 210×–1300× due to combined uncertainties
in stellar evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧). The 560 model variations lead
0,BHBH
to estimated merger rate densities in the ranges R m
= 3.8–
−3
−1
BHBH
−1
810 Gpc yr
and R det
= 17–12000 yr
for BHBHs,
0,BHNS
BHNS = 0.36–180 yr−1 for
Rm
= 2.2–830 Gpc−3 yr−1 and R det

5 CONCLUSIONS
In this study we simulated the rates and properties of BHBH, BHNS
and NSNS mergers detectable with existing GW detectors. We simultaneously examined the impact of two key modelling uncertainties
in population synthesis studies: uncertainties arising from massive
binary star evolution, and from the metallicity-dependent star formation history, S(𝑍, 𝑧). We accomplish this by simulating populations
of binaries over a grid of 53 birth metallicity values and taking into
account the S(𝑍, 𝑧) and GW detection probability. The resulting suite
of 560 model realizations (20 binary stellar evolution variations ×
28 S(𝑍, 𝑧) variations) is the largest of its kind, and made publicly
available. Our main findings within the context of the variations we
considered are summarized below.
• Merging DCO formation yields: We find for all our stellar
evolution variations that the merging BHBH (BHNS) formation
yield is typically a rapidly decreasing function of metallicity at
𝑍 & Z /10 (& Z /2) as a result of line-driven Wolf-Rayet like
winds. The NSNS yield, on the other hand, is relatively independent
of metallicity. We find that the formation yield of BHBH mergers for
𝑍 . Z /10 is remarkably constant over massive binary-star models
and 𝑍. The formation yields of BHNS and NSNS mergers are
impacted over the full metallicity range by our massive binary-star
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

0,NSNS
NSNS 0–12 yr−1
BHNSs, and R m
= 0.32–330 Gpc−3 yr−1 and R det
for NSNSs, for a ground-based GW detector consisting of LIGOVirgo-KAGRA at design sensitivity. In particular, we found that the
estimated BHBH merger rate densities are relatively sensitive to our
explored S(𝑍, 𝑧) uncertainties and might thereby present a good test
bed to constrain S(𝑍, 𝑧) prescriptions. On the other hand, we found
that the NSNS merger rate densities are sensitive to stellar evolution
models and therefore might be a good test bed to constrain stellar
evolution models. For BHNSs we find that the calculated rates
are significantly impacted by both uncertainties (see Figures 2 and 3).

• Merging DCO mass distribution shapes: We show in
Figures 4, 5 and 6 the impact from the massive binary-star and
S(𝑍, 𝑧) variations on the (normalized) shape of the detectable DCO
mass distributions (chirp mass, individual component masses and
mass ratios). We find that the shape of the BHNS mass distributions
are dominated by variations in binary stellar evolution within our
model explorations. For BHBH and NSNS mergers we find that the
mass distribution shapes are impacted by both variations in stellar
evolution and S(𝑍, 𝑧).
• Merging DCO 𝑡 delay and 𝑍 distribution shapes: We show
in Figures 7, 8 and 9 the impact from binary stellar evolution
and S(𝑍, 𝑧) variations on the delay time and birth metallicity

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes
distributions calculated in our models. We find that the S(𝑍, 𝑧) has a
significant impact for BHBH, BHNS and NSNS on the shape of the
delay time and metallicity distributions of detectable mergers. Several stellar evolution models, including those affecting stellar winds,
can also significantly impact the delay time and 𝑍 distribution shapes.
• Consistent features among our 560 model variations: We
find several features in the DCO mass distributions that are consistent among all our 560 model variations. First, we find that at
least 95%(99%) of the detectable BHBH mergers have mass ratios
𝑞 . 4(𝑞 . 6) in all 560 model variations (fifth column Figure 4).
Second, we find that more than 95% of BHBH mergers are always
expected to contain a BH with a mass & 8 M (third column Figure 4). Third, we find that less than 5% of the detectable merging
BHNS systems have BH masses 𝑚 BH & 18 M (third column Figure 5). Fourth we find that NSs in NSNS mergers are expected to
have lower masses on average compared to NSs in BHNS mergers
(Figures 5 and 6). We discuss how these findings are marginally
consistent with GW observations from GWTC-3 in §3.4.2 and §4.2.
Overall, our results highlight the importance of considering the
uncertainty in both the stellar evolution and metallicity-dependent
star formation history when exploring population synthesis simulations of BHNS, BHBH and NSNS mergers and when trying to infer
model properties from GW data.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank everyone in the COMPAS collaboration and Berger
Time-Domain Group for help. In addition, the authors thank the
Harvard FAS research computing group for technical support on
the simulations and high performance computing part of the research. The authors also thank Shanika Galaudage and Victoria
DiTomasso for their help with this paper. FSB thanks Christopher
Brown and Katie Callam for organizing the ‘writing oasis’. Lastly,
FSB wants to acknowledge the amount of serendipity and privilege that was involved to end up pursuing this astronomy research.
The Berger Time-Domain Group is supported in part by NSF and
NASA grants. Some of the authors are supported by the Australian
Research Council Centre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery (OzGrav), through project number CE170100004. FSB is
supported in part by the Prins Bernard Cultuurfonds studiebeurs
2021. IM is a recipient of the Australian Research Council Future
Fellowship FT190100574. A.V-G. acknowledges funding support
by the Danish National Research Foundation (DNRF132). SJ, LvS
and SdM acknowledge funding from the Netherlands Organisation
for Scientific Research (NWO), as part of the Vidi research program BinWaves (project number 639.042.728) and the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program from the
European Research Council (ERC, Grant agreement No. 715063).
LvS, TW and SdM acknowledge support by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. (NSF 2009131). This research has
made use of NASA’s Astrophysics Data System Bibliographic Services. This research has made use of data, software and/or web
tools obtained from the Gravitational Wave Open Science Center
(https://www.gw-openscience.org/), a service of LIGO Laboratory, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and the Virgo Collaboration. LIGO Laboratory and Advanced LIGO (LIGO Scientific
Collaboration et al. 2015) are funded by the United States National
Science Foundation (NSF) as well as the Science and Technology
Facilities Council (STFC) of the United Kingdom, the Max-PlanckSociety (MPS), and the State of Niedersachsen/Germany for support

21

of the construction of Advanced LIGO and construction and operation of the GEO600 detector. Additional support for Advanced
LIGO was provided by the Australian Research Council. Virgo (Acernese et al. 2015) is funded, through the European Gravitational
Observatory (EGO), by the French Centre National de Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS), the Italian Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN) and the Dutch Nikhef, with contributions by institutions
from Belgium, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Japan, Monaco,
Poland, Portugal, Spain (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al.
2021a).

DATA AVAILABILITY
All data used in this work is publicly available on Zenodo at
Broekgaarden (2021a, BHBH) Broekgaarden (2021b, BHNS) and
Broekgaarden (2021c, NSNS). All code to reproduce the results
and figures in this paper (and additional figures) are publicly available on Github at https://github.com/FloorBroekgaarden/
Double-Compact-Object-Mergers ¥.

SOFTWARE
Simulations in this paper made use of the COMPAS rapid binary population synthesis code, which is freely available at http:
//github.com/TeamCOMPAS/COMPAS (Team COMPAS: J. Riley
et al. 2021) including work based on (Stevenson et al. 2017; Barrett et al. 2018; Vigna-Gómez et al. 2018; Broekgaarden et al.
2019). The simulations performed in this work were simulated
with a COMPAS version that predates the publicly available code.
Our version of the code is most similar to version 02.13.01 of
the publicly available COMPAS code. Requests for the original
code can be made to the lead author. The authors used STROOPWAFEL from (Broekgaarden et al. 2019), publicly available at
https://github.com/FloorBroekgaarden/STROOPWAFEL13 .
The authors made use of Python from the Python Software Foundation. Python Language Reference, version 3.6. Available at http:
//www.python.org (van Rossum 1995). In addition the following Python packages were used: matplotlib (Hunter 2007), NumPy
(Harris et al. 2020), SciPy (Virtanen et al. 2020), ipython/jupyter
(Perez & Granger 2007; Kluyver et al. 2016), pandas (Wes McKinney 2010), Seaborn (Waskom & the seaborn development team
2020), Astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2018) and hdf5 (Collette 2013).
Figure 10 makes use of the make_plots_Vamana.py code by
Vaibhav Tiwari on behalf of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, Virgo
Collaboration and KAGRA Collaboration provided under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 licence. We obtained their code from
Zenodo doi:10.5281/zenodo.5655785, which makes use of the
kernel density estimator as provided in https://dcc.ligo.org/
LIGO-T2100447/public (Sadiq et al. 2021). The simulations were
performed on the super computers from the Harvard FAS research
computing group.

REFERENCES
Abbott B. P., et al., 2017, Phys. Rev. Lett., 119, 161101

13

For the latest pip installable version of STROOPWAFEL please contact
the corresponding author.
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

22

Broekgaarden et al.

Abbott B. P., et al., 2019, Physical Review X, 9, 031040
Abbott B. P., Abbott R., Abbott T. D., others Zweizig J., 2020a, Living
Reviews in Relativity, 23, 3
Abbott R., et al., 2020b, Phys. Rev. D, 102, 043015
Abbott B. P., et al., 2020c, ApJ, 892, L3
Abbott R., et al., 2020d, ApJ, 896, L44
Abbott R., et al., 2020e, ApJ, 900, L13
Abbott R., et al., 2021a, Physical Review X, 11, 021053
Abbott R., et al., 2021b, ApJ, 913, L7
Abbott R., et al., 2021c, ApJ, 915, L5
Acernese F., et al., 2015, Classical and Quantum Gravity, 32, 024001
Agrawal P., Hurley J., Stevenson S., Szécsi D., Flynn C., 2020, MNRAS, 497,
4549
Anagnostou O., Trenti M., Melatos A., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2010.06161
Arca Sedda M., 2021, ApJ, 908, L38
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2018, AJ, 156, 123
Barrett J. W., Gaebel S. M., Neĳssel C. J., Vigna-Gómez A., Stevenson S.,
Berry C. P. L., Farr W. M., Mandel I., 2018, MNRAS, 477, 4685
Bavera S. S., et al., 2021, A&A, 647, A153
Belczynski K., Kalogera V., Rasio F. A., Taam R. E., Zezas A., Bulik T.,
Maccarone T. J., Ivanova N., 2008, ApJS, 174, 223
Belczynski K., Dominik M., Bulik T., O’Shaughnessy R., Fryer C., Holz
D. E., 2010, ApJ, 715, L138
Belczynski K., et al., 2020, A&A, 636, A104
Belczynski K., et al., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2108.10885
Bhattacharya D., van den Heuvel E. P. J., 1991, Phys. Rep., 203, 1
Boco L., Lapi A., Chruslinska M., Donevski D., Sicilia A., Danese L., 2021,
ApJ, 907, 110
Bouffanais Y., Mapelli M., Gerosa D., Di Carlo U. N., Giacobbo N., Berti E.,
Baibhav V., 2019, ApJ, 886, 25
Bouffanais Y., Mapelli M., Santoliquido F., Giacobbo N., Di Carlo U. N.,
Rastello S., Artale M. C., Iorio G., 2021, MNRAS, 507, 5224
Briel M. M., Eldridge J. J., Stanway E. R., Stevance H. F., Chrimes A. A.,
2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2111.08124
Broekgaarden F. S., 2021a, BHBH simulations from: Impact of Massive
Binary Star and Cosmic Evolution on Gravitational Wave Observations II:
Double Compact Object Mergers, doi:10.5281/zenodo.5651073, https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5651073
Broekgaarden F. S., 2021b, BHNS simulations from: Impact of Massive
Binary Star and Cosmic Evolution on Gravitational Wave Observations II:
Double Compact Object Mergers, doi:10.5281/zenodo.5178777, https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5178777
Broekgaarden F. S., 2021c, NSNS simulations from: Impact of Massive
Binary Star and Cosmic Evolution on Gravitational Wave Observations II: Double Compact Object Mergers, doi:10.5281/zenodo.5189849,
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5189849
Broekgaarden F. S., Berger E., 2021, ApJ, 920, L13
Broekgaarden F. S., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 490, 5228
Broekgaarden F. S., et al., 2021, MNRAS,
Chattopadhyay D., Stevenson S., Hurley J. R., Rossi L. J., Flynn C., 2020,
MNRAS, 494, 1587
Chattopadhyay D., Stevenson S., Hurley J. R., Bailes M., Broekgaarden F.,
2021, MNRAS, 504, 3682
Chruślińska M., Nelemans G., 2019, MNRAS, 488, 5300
Chruślińska M., Belczynski K., Klencki J., Benacquista M., 2018, MNRAS,
474, 2937
Chruślińska M., Nelemans G., Belczynski K., 2019, MNRAS, 482, 5012
Chruślińska M., Nelemans G., Boco L., Lapi A., 2021, MNRAS,
Chu Q., Yu S., Lu Y., 2021, MNRAS,
Collette A., 2013, Python and HDF5. O’Reilly
Costa G., Bressan A., Mapelli M., Marigo P., Iorio G., Spera M., 2021,
MNRAS, 501, 4514
Dabrowny M., Giacobbo N., Gerosa D., 2021, Rendiconti Lincei. Scienze
Fisiche e Naturali,
de Kool M., 1990, ApJ, 358, 189
de Mink S. E., Belczynski K., 2015, ApJ, 814, 58
de Mink S. E., Mandel I., 2016, MNRAS, 460, 3545
MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

Delgado A. J., Thomas H. C., 1981, A&A, 96, 142
Dewi J. D. M., Pols O. R., 2003, MNRAS, 344, 629
Di Carlo U. N., Mapelli M., Bouffanais Y., Giacobbo N., Santoliquido F.,
Bressan A., Spera M., Haardt F., 2020, MNRAS, 497, 1043
Dominik M., Belczynski K., Fryer C., Holz D. E., Berti E., Bulik T., Mand
el I., O’Shaughnessy R., 2012, ApJ, 759, 52
Dominik M., et al., 2015, ApJ, 806, 263
du Buisson L., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 499, 5941
Farmer R., Renzo M., de Mink S. E., Marchant P., Justham S., 2019, ApJ,
887, 53
Farmer R., Renzo M., de Mink S. E., Fishbach M., Justham S., 2020, ApJ,
902, L36
Fishbach M., Kalogera V., 2021, ApJ, 914, L30
Fragione G., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2110.09604
Franciolini G., et al., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2105.03349
Fryer C. L., Belczynski K., Wiktorowicz G., Dominik M., Kalogera V., Holz
D. E., 2012, ApJ, 749, 91
Furlong M., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 450, 4486
Giacobbo N., Mapelli M., 2018, MNRAS, 480, 2011
Giacobbo N., Mapelli M., Spera M., 2018, MNRAS, 474, 2959
Hamann W. R., Koesterke L., 1998, A&A, 335, 1003
Hamann W. R., et al., 2019, A&A, 625, A57
Han Z.-W., Ge H.-W., Chen X.-F., Chen H.-L., 2020, Research in Astronomy
and Astrophysics, 20, 161
Harris C. R., et al., 2020, Nature, 585, 357–362
Hinshaw G., et al., 2013, ApJS, 208, 19
Hunter J. D., 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 90
Hurley J. R., Pols O. R., Tout C. A., 2000, MNRAS, 315, 543
Hurley J. R., Tout C. A., Pols O. R., 2002, MNRAS, 329, 897
Im M., et al., 2017, ApJ, 849, L16
Ivanova N., Justham S., Ricker P., 2020, Common Envelope Evolution,
doi:10.1088/2514-3433/abb6f0.
Kalogera V., Webbink R. F., 1996, ApJ, 458, 301
Kimball C., et al., 2021, ApJ, 915, L35
Klencki J., Moe M., Gladysz W., Chruslinska M., Holz D. E., Belczynski K.,
2018, A&A, 619, A77
Klencki J., Nelemans G., Istrate A. G., Chruslinska M., 2021, A&A, 645,
A54
Kluyver T., et al., 2016, in ELPUB. pp 87–90
Kremer K., et al., 2020, ApJ, 903, 45
Kruckow M. U., Tauris T. M., Langer N., Kramer M., Izzard R. G., 2018,
MNRAS, 481, 1908
LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al., 2015, Classical and Quantum Gravity,
32, 074001
Lamberts A., Garrison-Kimmel S., Clausen D. R., Hopkins P. F., 2016, MNRAS, 463, L31
Langer N., Norman C. A., 2006, ApJ, 638, L63
Laplace E., Götberg Y., de Mink S. E., Justham S., Farmer R., 2020, A&A,
637, A6
Lau M. Y. M., Hirai R., González-Bolívar M., Price D. J., De Marco O.,
Mandel I., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2111.00923
Linden T., Kalogera V., Sepinsky J. F., Prestwich A., Zezas A., Gallagher
J. S., 2010, ApJ, 725, 1984
Lu W., Beniamini P., Bonnerot C., 2021, MNRAS, 500, 1817
Ma X., Hopkins P. F., Faucher-Giguère C.-A., Zolman N., Muratov A. L.,
Kereš D., Quataert E., 2016, MNRAS, 456, 2140
Madau P., Dickinson M., 2014, ARA&A, 52, 415
Madau P., Fragos T., 2017, ApJ, 840, 39
Mandel I., Broekgaarden F. S., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2107.14239
Mandel I., Farmer A., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1806.05820
Mandel I., Müller B., Riley J., de Mink S. E., Vigna-Gómez A., Chattopadhyay
D., 2021, MNRAS, 500, 1380
Mandhai S., Lamb G. P., Tanvir N. R., Bray J., Nixon C. J., EylesFerris R. A. J., Levan A. J., Gompertz B. P., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2109.09714
Mapelli M., 2021, Formation Channels of Single and Binary Stellar-Mass
Black Holes. p. 4, doi:10.1007/978-981-15-4702-7_16-1
Mapelli M., Giacobbo N., Ripamonti E., Spera M., 2017, MNRAS, 472, 2422

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes
Mapelli M., Spera M., Montanari E., Limongi M., Chieffi A., Giacobbo N.,
Bressan A., Bouffanais Y., 2020, ApJ, 888, 76
Marchant P., Langer N., Podsiadlowski P., Tauris T. M., de Mink S., Mandel
I., Moriya T. J., 2017, A&A, 604, A55
Marchant P., Renzo M., Farmer R., Pappas K. M. W., Taam R. E., de Mink
S. E., Kalogera V., 2019, ApJ, 882, 36
Marchant P., Pappas K. M. W., Gallegos-Garcia M., Berry C. P. L., Taam
R. E., Kalogera V., Podsiadlowski P., 2021, A&A, 650, A107
Massevitch A., Yungelson L., 1975, Mem. Soc. Astron. Italiana, 46, 217
McKernan B., Ford K. E. S., O’Shaughnessy R., 2020, MNRAS, 498, 4088
Mehta A. K., Buonanno A., Gair J., Miller M. C., Farag E., deBoer R. J.,
Wiescher M., Timmes F. X., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2105.06366
Moe M., Di Stefano R., 2017, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series,
230, 15
Neĳssel C. J., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 490, 3740
Ng K. K. Y., Vitale S., Farr W. M., Rodriguez C. L., 2021, ApJ, 913, L5
Olejak A., Belczynski K., Ivanova N., 2021, A&A, 651, A100
Paczyński B., Sienkiewicz R., 1972, Acta Astron., 22, 73
Panter B., Heavens A. F., Jimenez R., 2004, MNRAS, 355, 764
Perez F., Granger B. E., 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 21
Pfahl E., Rappaport S., Podsiadlowski P., 2002, ApJ, 571, L37
Podsiadlowski P., Langer N., Poelarends A. J. T., Rappaport S., Heger A.,
Pfahl E., 2004, ApJ, 612, 1044
Rastello S., Mapelli M., Di Carlo U. N., Giacobbo N., Santoliquido F., Spera
M., Ballone A., Iorio G., 2020, MNRAS, 497, 1563
Renzo M., et al., 2019, A&A, 624, A66
Rodriguez C. L., Morscher M., Pattabiraman B., Chatterjee S., Haster C.-J.,
Rasio F. A., 2015, Phys. Rev. Lett., 115, 051101
Rodriguez C. L., Chatterjee S., Rasio F. A., 2016, Phys. Rev. D, 93, 084029
Román-Garza J., et al., 2021, ApJ, 912, L23
Sadiq J., Dent T., Wysocki D., 2021, Available as LIGO-T2100447
Safarzadeh M., Berger E., Ng K. K. Y., Chen H.-Y., Vitale S., Whittle C.,
Scannapieco E., 2019, ApJ, 878, L13
Sana H., 2017, in Eldridge J. J., Bray J. C., McClelland L. A. S., Xiao L., eds,
IAU Symposium Vol. 329, The Lives and Death-Throes of Massive Stars.
pp 110–117 (arXiv:1703.01608), doi:10.1017/S1743921317003209
Sander A. A. C., Vink J. S., 2020, MNRAS, 499, 873
Santoliquido F., Mapelli M., Giacobbo N., Bouffanais Y., Artale M. C., 2021,
MNRAS, 502, 4877
Schneider F. R. N., Izzard R. G., Langer N., de Mink S. E., 2015, ApJ, 805,
20
Schootemeĳer A., Langer N., Grin N. J., Wang C., 2019, A&A, 625, A132
Secunda A., et al., 2020, ApJ, 903, 133
Shao Y., Li X.-D., 2018, ApJ, 867, 124
Shenar T., et al., 2019, A&A, 627, A151
Smarr L. L., Blandford R., 1976, ApJ, 207, 574
Soberman G. E., Phinney E. S., van den Heuvel E. P. J., 1997, A&A, 327,
620
Spera M., Mapelli M., 2017, MNRAS, 470, 4739
Spera M., Mapelli M., Giacobbo N., Trani A. A., Bressan A., Costa G., 2019,
MNRAS, 485, 889
Srinivasan G., 1989, A&ARv, 1, 209
Stevenson S., Vigna-Gómez A., Mandel I., Barrett J. W., Neĳssel C. J., Perkins
D., de Mink S. E., 2017, Nature Communications, 8, 14906
Stevenson S., Sampson M., Powell J., Vigna-Gómez A., Neĳssel C. J., Szécsi
D., Mandel I., 2019, ApJ, 882, 121
Strolger L.-G., et al., 2004, ApJ, 613, 200
Tang P. N., Eldridge J. J., Stanway E. R., Bray J. C., 2020, MNRAS, 493, L6
Tanikawa A., Yoshida T., Kinugawa T., Trani A. A., Hosokawa T., Susa H.,
Omukai K., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2110.10846
Tauris T. M., et al., 2017, ApJ, 846, 170
Team COMPAS: J. Riley et al., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2109.10352
The LIGO Scientific Collaboration the Virgo Collaboration the KAGRA
Collaboration 2021a, The population of merging compact binaries inferred using gravitational waves through GWTC-3 - Data release,
doi:10.5281/zenodo.5655785, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
5655785

23

The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al., 2021b, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2111.03606
The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al., 2021c, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2111.03634
Timmes F. X., Woosley S. E., Weaver T. A., 1996, ApJ, 457, 834
van Rossum G., 1995, Technical Report CS-R9526, Python tutorial. Centrum
voor Wiskunde en Informatica (CWI), Amsterdam
van Son L. A. C., et al., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2110.01634
Vigna-Gómez A., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 481, 4009
Vigna-Gómez A., Toonen S., Ramirez-Ruiz E., Leigh N. W. C., Riley J.,
Haster C.-J., 2021, ApJ, 907, L19
Vinciguerra S., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 498, 4705
Vink J. S., 2017, A&A, 607, L8
Vink J. S., de Koter A., 2005, A&A, 442, 587
Virtanen P., et al., 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261
Wagg T., Broekgaarden F. S., de Mink S. E., van Son L. A. C., Frankel N.,
Justham S., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2111.13704
Waskom M., the seaborn development team 2020, mwaskom/seaborn,
doi:10.5281/zenodo.592845, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
592845
Webbink R. F., 1984, ApJ, 277, 355
Wes McKinney 2010, in Stéfan van der Walt Jarrod Millman eds, Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference. pp 56 – 61,
doi:10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a
Woosley S. E., 2017, ApJ, 836, 244
Woosley S. E., Heger A., 2021, ApJ, 912, L31
Xu X.-J., Li X.-D., 2010a, ApJ, 716, 114
Xu X.-J., Li X.-D., 2010b, ApJ, 722, 1985
Zevin M., Pankow C., Rodriguez C. L., Sampson L., Chase E., Kalogera V.,
Rasio F. A., 2017, ApJ, 846, 82
Zevin M., Spera M., Berry C. P. L., Kalogera V., 2020a, ApJ, 899, L1
Zevin M., Kelley L. Z., Nugent A., Fong W.-f., Berry C. P. L., Kalogera V.,
2020b, ApJ, 904, 190
Zevin M., et al., 2021, ApJ, 910, 152

APPENDIX A: ADDITIONAL TABLES AND FIGURES
In this appendix we show a Table and three additional figures that
are mentioned throughout the main text.
First, Table A1 summarizes the 28 S(𝑍, 𝑧) models that are explored in this study. More details about the assumptions in each
model can be found in Broekgaarden et al. (2021) and Neĳssel et al.
(2019).
Second, in Figure A1 we show similar to Figure 1 the formation
yield of DCO systems that merge in a Hubble time as a function
of the birth metallicity. However, in this figure we show the relative
formation yields between BHNS to BHBH (left panel) and between
NSNS and BHBH (right panel). It can be seen that in most models
the formation yield of BHNS mergers exceeds that of BHBH around
birth metallicities 𝑍 & 𝑍/2. The yield of NSNS mergers surpasses
the BHBH yield for most models around 𝑍/ Z .
Third, in Figure A2 we visualize two of our S(𝑍, 𝑧) model variations, xyz = 312 and xyz = 231. The xyz = 312 (xyz = 231 ) model is
the S(𝑍, 𝑧) distribution that correspond to one of the highest (lowest)
average 𝑍 and results in one of the lowest (highest) BHBH merger
rates in Figure 2.
Last, Figure A3 shows a zoom in on one of the percentile distribution panels from Figure 4 (the top row, second column panel).
We highlight in this figure the labels of the S(𝑍, 𝑧) models that
correspond to the order of the horizontal percentile bars.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

Broekgaarden et al.

24

xyz index

SFRD [x]

GSMF [y]

000

MZR [z]

preferred phenomenological model from Neĳssel et al. (2019)

1
2
3

Madau & Dickinson (2014)
Strolger et al. (2004)
Madau & Fragos (2017)

Panter et al. (2004)
Furlong et al. (2015) single Schechter
Furlong et al. (2015) double Schechter

Langer & Norman (2006)
Langer & Norman (2006) + offset
Ma et al. (2016)

Table A1. List of the assumptions for the metallicity-specifc star formation rate, S (𝑍 , 𝑧), models that we explore in this study. 27 S (𝑍 , 𝑧) models are obtained
by combining a star formation rate density (SFRD) with a galaxy stellar mass function (GSMF) and mass-metallicity relation (MZR). See §2.2 and paper I for
more details. The models are named in the convention xyz, where x, y, z ∈ [1, 2, 3] are the index numbers for the models used for the SFRD, GSMF and MZR,
respectively. For example, the combination of using the Madau & Dickinson (2014) SFRD with the Panter et al. (2004) GSMF and the Ma et al. (2016) MZR is
labeled 113. The preferred phenomenological model from Neĳssel et al. (2019) has the label 000 and is not a specific combination but a parameterized model
that is built to be flexible and is fitted to match the observed BHBH merger rate and chirp mass distribution from the first two runs of LIGO and Virgo.

BHBH
RNSNS
form /Rform

101

BHBH
RBHNS
form < Rform

10−1

Z=Z

Z = 0.0105

Z = Z /2

Z = Z /5

Z = 0.001

2

100

BHBH
RNSNS
form > Rform
BHBH
RNSNS
form < Rform

10−1

10−2
10−3
−4.0

Z = Z /10

NSNS/BHBH

101
BHBH
RBHNS
form > Rform

R: SN vk,BH = 0 km s−1
S: fWR = 0.1
T: fWR = 5

1D
P: SN σrms
= 100 km s−1

10

100

1D
= 30 km s−1
Q: SN σrms

M: max mNS = 2.0 M
N: max mNS = 3.0 M
O: no PISN

103

Z=Z

Z = Z /2

Z = 0.0105

I: αCE = 2
J: αCE = 10
K: optimistic CE
L: rapid SN

2

10
BHBH
RBHNS
form /Rform

Z = Z /5

BHNS/BHBH

E: unstable case BB
F: E + K
G: αCE = 0.1
H: αCE = 0.5

Z = Z /10

103

Z = 0.001

A: fiducial
B: β = 0.25
C: β = 0.5
D: β = 0.75

10−2

−3.5

−3.0
−2.5
log10(Z)

−2.0

10−3
−4.0

−3.5

−3.0
−2.5
log10(Z)

−2.0

Figure A1. The ratio of formation yields of merging double compact objects per solar mass of star formation (d𝑁form /d𝑀SFR ) as a function of birth metallicity
(𝑍 ). The left panel shows the ratio of BHNS to BHBH formation yields and the right panel shows the ratio of NSNS to BHBH formation yields. Each color and
marker type corresponds to one of the 20 binary population synthesis models explored in this study (Table 1). Vertical dotted lines show fixed 𝑍 values. The
marker points show the 𝑍 grid points that we simulated with COMPAS. Scatter points are missing where we divide by zero. H Y

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

Gravitational Wave Rates and Distribution Shapes

1

9

1.6
1.4

d2MSFR/(dtsdVc) [108 M yr−1 Gpc−3]

xyz = 312 (lowest DCO merger rates R)

0.8
0.6
0.4

hZii ≈ Z /10

1.0

hZii ≈ Z /5

hZii ≈ Z /2

1.2

0.2
0.0

0

1

2

3
Redshift z

4

5

6

7

5

-2.00

age universe [Gyr]
3
2

4

1

xyz = 231 (highest DCO merger rates R)

1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0

1

(a) The xyz = 312 S (𝑍 , 𝑧) model.

hZii ≈ 0.001

age universe [Gyr]
3
2

4

hZii ≈ Z /10

5

hZii ≈ Z /2

7

-3.00 log10(Zi) -2.50

-3.50

hZii ≈ Z

d2MSFR/(dtsdVc) [108 M yr−1 Gpc−3]

9

-2.00

hZii ≈ Z /5

-3.00 log10(Zi) -2.50

-3.50

25

2

3
Redshift z

4

5

6

(b) The xyz = 231 S (𝑍 , 𝑧) model.

Figure A2. The SFRD as a function of redshift and metallicity for two S (𝑍 , 𝑧) models from Table A1 used in this study. The left panel shows the xyz = 312
S (𝑍 , 𝑧) model whilst the right panel shows the xyz = 231 S (𝑍 , 𝑧) model, these correspond to the S (𝑍 , 𝑧) models with the highest and lowest average 𝑍 ,
respectively. In color we show the build up of the SFRD from the contribution by different 𝑍 , where for visual purposes we divided the SFRD into a few
metallicity bins. H H Y

median

50% interval

90% interval

99% interval
S(Z, z)
model

model A

333
233
133
332
232
132
331
231
131
323
223
123
322
222
122
321
221
121
313
213
113
312
212
112
311
211
111
000

5

10

15

20
Mc [M ]

25

30

35

Figure A3. Zoom in on the chirp mass percentile panel for model A for detectable BHBH mergers at design sensitivity from Figure 4. Each of the 28 individual
horizontal bars visualizes the median (scatter points), 50 , 90 and 99 (three shades) distribution intervals. On the right of the horizontal bar we show the S (𝑍 , 𝑧)
model name as given in Table A1. H Y

MNRAS 000, 1–23 (2021)

