MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

Preprint 11 September 2019

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0

arXiv:1905.00910v2 [astro-ph.HE] 10 Sep 2019

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare outcomes from
astrophysical populations, with application to
gravitational-wave sources∗
Floor S. Broekgaarden,1−5 † Stephen Justham,7,8,1,2,5 Selma E. de Mink,6,1,2
Jonathan Gair,9,10,5 Ilya Mandel,3,4,11,5 Simon Stevenson,4,12
Jim
W. Barrett,13 Alejandro Vigna-Gómez,11,3,4,5 Coenraad J. Neijssel11,14
1

Anton Pannekoek Institute for Astronomy, University of Amsterdam, Postbus 94249, 1090 GE Amsterdam, The Netherlands

2 GRAPPA, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, 1098 XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands
3 Monash Centre for Astrophysics, School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
4 The ARC Center of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery – OzGrav
5 Dark Cosmology Centre, Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Juliane Maries Vej 30, DK-2100, Københaven ø, Denmark
6 Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138
7 School of Astronomy & Space Science, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100012, China
8 National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100012, China
9 School of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh, The King‘s Buildings, Peter Guthrie Tait Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3FD, UK
10 Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute), Am Mühlenberg 1, Potsdam-Golm 14476, Germany
11 Birmingham Institute for Gravitational Wave Astronomy and School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham,

Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom
12 Center for Astrophysics and Supercomputing, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn VIC 3122, Australia,
13 Klarna Bank AB (publ). Sveavägen 46, 111 34 Stockholm
14 Albert-Einstein-Institut, Max-Planck-Institut für Gravitationsphysik, D-30167 Hannover, Germany

11 September 2019

ABSTRACT

Gravitational-wave observations of double compact object (DCO) mergers are providing new insights into the physics of massive stars and the evolution of binary systems.
Making the most of expected near-future observations for understanding stellar physics
will rely on comparisons with binary population synthesis models. However, the vast
majority of simulated binaries never produce DCOs, which makes calculating such populations computationally inefficient. We present an importance sampling algorithm,
STROOPWAFEL, that improves the computational efficiency of population studies
of rare events, by focusing the simulation around regions of the initial parameter space
found to produce outputs of interest. We implement the algorithm in the binary population synthesis code COMPAS, and compare the efficiency of our implementation
to the standard method of Monte Carlo sampling from the birth probability distributions. STROOPWAFEL finds ∼25–200 times more DCO mergers than the standard
sampling method with the same simulation size, and so speeds up simulations by up to
two orders of magnitude. Finding more DCO mergers automatically maps the parameter space with far higher resolution than when using the traditional sampling. This
increase in efficiency also leads to a decrease of a factor ∼3–10 in statistical sampling
uncertainty for the predictions from the simulations. This is particularly notable for
the distribution functions of observable quantities such as the black hole and neutron
star chirp mass distribution, including in the tails of the distribution functions where
predictions using standard sampling can be dominated by sampling noise. 
Key words: gravitational waves – stars: evolution – binaries: general – methods:
numerical – methods: statistical

∗STROOPWAFEL: Simulating The Rare Outcomes Of Populations With AIS For Efficient Learning.
© 2019 The Authors

†E-mail: fbroekgaarden@g.harvard.edu

2
1

Broekgaarden et al.
INTRODUCTION

The direct detection of gravitational waves originating from
merging binary black holes (BHs) and neutron stars (NSs)
has opened up a new window on the Universe, and marked
the birth of gravitational-wave astrophysics as a new field of
research (Abbott et al. 2016, 2017). At the time of writing
the first two observing runs of Advanced LIGO and Virgo
have been completed (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration
et al. 2018). A few dozen detections are expected during
the third observing run, and we can anticipate hundreds of
detections per year when the next generation of detectors
with higher sensitivities come online (Abbott et al. 2018).
The detections are starting to reveal the properties of
the population of merging binary BHs and NSs. The distributions of the inferred masses and spins contain valuable
information about their origin. Distinguishing different theories for their formation and learning about the complex
physical processes that govern the lives of their possible
massive-star progenitors requires comparing observed populations with theoretical predictions.
Theoretical simulations of the population of merging
DCOs are challenging because gravitational-wave events
represent an extremely rare outcome of binary evolution.
From a thousand massive binary systems typically only of order one, or less, yields a double compact object. A meaningful comparison with population observations requires simulating a statistically significant sample of events. When sampling from the birth distributions, which is a form of sampling commonly used in binary population synthesis, this
often means we need to sample at least many millions of
binary systems. For example, Kruckow et al. (2018) find
that their DCO merger rates converge only when simulating
N > 3 × 108 binaries (and for BH–BH mergers their statistical noise remains at the 2 percent level even with N = 109
samples).
To make it feasible to simulate such large numbers of
systems, all present-day simulations pay a high price. In
many studies computational speed is ensured by using highly
approximate algorithms that treat the physical processes in
a simplified way. Another way to keep the computational
costs reasonable is to limit the total number of simulations,
restricting the exploration of the impact of the uncertain
physical input assumptions beyond a few variations.
The recent detections bring to light a further challenge
as we start to ask questions about rare subsets of the already
rare gravitational-wave events. One example is the subset of
heavy binary black hole mergers with total system masses in
excess of 50 M . Such systems produce loud GW signals and
can thus be observed over large volumes (Fishbach & Holz
2017). The majority of currently observed BH–BH mergers
have total masses above 50 M (The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. 2018). However, they are very rare in simulations of binaries sampled from the expected distribution
of initial conditions. Most current theoretical predictions for
the extreme tails of the mass distribution are heavily affected by Poisson noise, resulting from under sampling. A
second example of an astrophysically important rare subset
of the rare gravitational-wave events are the NS–NS systems
that merge within about 50 Myrs from the moment the NS–
NS is formed. Early NS–NS mergers are important as they
are candidate sources for the observed early r-process en-

riched ultra-faint dwarf galaxies such as Reticulum II and
Tucana III (e.g. Safarzadeh et al. 2019). A third example are
the subset of BH–NS mergers with sufficiently similar components masses that there is significant tidal ejection from
the merger to produce electromagnetic counterparts (Foucart et al. 2018). Obtaining statistically accurate predictions
for the extreme tails of the distribution functions for rare
but astrophysically important subpopulations is currently a
challenge for most simulations.
Earlier studies have proposed improvements of the efficiency of population synthesis studies. Kolb (1993) and
later Politano (1996) implemented a transformation function using Jacobian matrices to map known birth rates of
cataclysmic variables directly into present day populations.
Kalogera (1996) adopted this method, developed an analytical model for the kick prescription and showed that it is
possible to obtain similar expressions for several observable
distribution functions (Kalogera & Webbink 1998; Kalogera
2000). More recently, Andrews et al. (2018) implemented
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to efficiently
simulate populations of binaries matching specified evolutionary endpoints, whereas Barrett et al. (2017) and Taylor & Gerosa (2018) use Gaussian process emulators to predict outputs of the binary population synthesis model for
parametrised choices of physical assumptions that have not
been simulated. However, current binary population synthesis models have complex output functions containing natural
bifurcations (e.g., small changes in the initial mass of a star
can lead to drastic changes in the final mass in the simulations). Moreover, binary population synthesis simulation
output spaces often contain stochastic behaviour (e.g., due
to the randomly drawn neutron star natal kick). Such discontinuities pose a challenge for MCMC methods and Gaussian process regression emulators, as they rely on a certain
smoothness in order to converge and produce independent
samples.
In this paper we present a new algorithm, STROOPWAFEL∗,1 . We have designed STROOPWAFEL to improve the efficiency of simulations of rare astrophysical
events, and so to enable accurate simulations of populations
of extremely rare events at reasonable computational cost.
The algorithm first explores the initial parameter space until
it finds a preliminary population of systems of interest. This
exploration is done by stochastically sampling from the birth
distributions. STROOPWAFEL then concentrates the later
sampling towards regions in the initial parameter space that
are in the vicinity of the initial parameters of the interesting
binaries found during the exploration phase. This is an example of “Adaptive Importance Sampling” (AIS), described
further in the next section.
We focus here on the application of the study of DCO
mergers as gravitational-wave sources, but our algorithm is
much more broadly applicable. The user can specify any target population of interest. An advantage of the algorithm
is that it can handle the bifurcations and stochastic be-

1

All data that has been used for this study, accompanied with a
Jupyter notebook that reproduces the main results, can be found
here . The code for the STROOPWAFEL algorithm will be
made publicly available after acceptance. Early inquiries can be
addressed to the lead author.
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare events
haviour that naturally occur in the physical prescriptions
in binary population synthesis simulations, and which lead
to discontinuous output surfaces. Finally, with our algorithm
we can easily derive the uncertainties on the estimated parameters which can be a challenge for sampling methods
such as MCMC and Gaussian Process regression emulators.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the algorithm and provide expressions for how to calculate statistical estimates and the uncertainties from the
simulations. We further derive the optimal relative duration
of the exploratory phase and the total number of simulations, given the rareness of the target population. In Section 3 we provide a demonstration of our algorithm. We
apply it to population synthesis simulations of double compact object mergers. In Section 4 we outline caveats and
future directions for further improvement and refinement of
the algorithm. We conclude and summarise in Section 5.

2

METHOD

Our algorithm is conceptually simple. It uses a strategy that
may be familiar from playing the classic game Battleship.
The aim of this game is to guess the coordinates of the ships
of the other player, which are placed on a regular discrete
grid. Most players will probably start with an exploration
phase randomly trying different coordinates. After one or
more successful “hits” most players will change their search
strategy and instead try to refine their search by trying coordinates that are close to the successful hits until they uncover the full location and orientation of the ship. It has been
shown that this is a more successful strategy compared to
searching completely randomly throughout the entire game
(e.g. Jones 1977).
Our algorithm, STROOPWAFEL, follows a conceptually similar strategy, but instead of aiming to win a game
of Battleship the algorithm is designed to improve the efficiency for simulating populations of rare events (that is,
rare outcomes from the space of initial conditions). Successful hits in this analogy are finding systems of interest that are
part of a certain target population. These may be systems
that result in DCO mergers or anything that the user specifies. We improve the efficiency by focusing on areas of the initial parameter space near to those which produced outcomes
of interest during a prior, exploratory, sampling phase. Instead of Monte Carlo sampling from the birth probability
distributions, STROOPWAFEL uses information from that
exploratory sampling phase to create an alternative distribution function, from which it then samples.
This class of Monte Carlo methods is generically called
“Importance Sampling” (Kahn & Harris 1951; Kahn & Marshall 1953). Since we do not know in advance which areas
of the initial parameter space should receive extra attention
we use adaptive importance sampling (AIS), for which see,
e.g., Torrie & Valleau (1977); Hesterberg (1995); Ortiz &
Pack Kaelbling (2013); Pennanen & Koivu (2006); Cappé
et al. (2004); Cornuet et al. (2012). The nature of the AIS
algorithm makes it straightforward to tune the focus of the
simulation on a specific target population or function of interest (Cappé et al. 2008). Such AIS algorithms also allow for
straightforward calculations of the sampling uncertainties.
The STROOPWAFEL implementation of AIS is similar to
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

3

that in Cornuet et al. (2012), but includes a new method to
guide the fraction of the computational effort that should be
spent on the exploratory phase (see Sect 2.2.4).
Whilst the concept of our algorithm is not complicated,
there are some mathematical details involved in making the
implementation efficient and robust. For example, some of
the subtlety involved is in making sure not to concentrate
too closely on locations which previously led to success. If
we only look exactly where we have looked before, then we
don’t learn anything new.
Section 2.1 introduces binary population synthesis as
a mapping between input and output parameter spaces,
along with some notation which is useful for the description of our algorithm. Section 2.2 presents the key details
of STROOPWAFEL. We explain how we shape the adaptive sampling distribution from the information found in an
initial exploratory phase, and how to optimally combine the
samples from both the exploratory and adapted phases to
estimate the population quantities of interest. We also describe how STROOPWAFEL self-consistently determines
how long the exploratory phase should last as a fraction
of the simulation time, based on continually updated estimates of the rareness of the target population. Section 2.3
illustrates the practical characteristics of our AIS algorithm
in an idealised way, providing an explanatory summary of
the behaviour of STROOPWAFEL for users who do not
wish to learn all the mathematical details.
2.1

Definition of concepts and symbols

Binary population synthesis models the population observables for a particular class of event, under a set of assumptions about the physics. Predicting such an output population typically involves simulating many individual systems
from their initial conditions. Only a small fraction of those
simulated systems may produce outcomes which are of interest for that study.
Selecting which specific points in the input space (i.e.,
the initial conditions) to simulate into the output space (i.e.,
the observables) is a key part of population synthesis. This
process is called sampling, and must appropriately take into
account the relative frequency of different initial conditions.
Ideally, it should also efficiently explore the initial parameter space. Examples of these initial parameters are the initial
masses of the two stars, m1,i and m2,i , and the initial separation ai between the two stars. For a given initial composition,
these three dimensions are often regarded as adequate initial
conditions. However, more generally, these input conditions
may be distributed over many dimensions.
Each initial binary system xi ∈ {x1 , ..., xN } in a binary population synthesis can thus be written as xi =
(m1,i , m2,i , ai , ...), which has a combined birth distribution
π(xi ) = π(m1,i , m2,i , ai , · · · ).

(1)

This distribution of initial conditions is often taken as the
Monte Carlo sampling distribution2 . In practice, simulations

2

Binary population synthesis simulations often sample in the
initial mass ratio, m2,i /m1,i , rather than the mass of the initially
least-massive star. This includes the simulations we present later;
see also Appendix C. Whether sampling in m2,i or the mass ratio

4

Broekgaarden et al.

Figure 1. Illustration of the STROOPWAFEL algorithm. In the algorithm, (I) we first draw random binaries from the birth distribution
π until a small population of events of interest (hits) is found. (II) We construct Gaussian distributions around each of the previously
found successful events. We create an adapted instrumental distribution q(x) from the mixture of Gaussian distributions. We scale the
width of each Gaussian with the local sampling density. (III) We draw the remaining samples from this adapted distribution which
focuses around the target population. The top panels show a random draw of samples from the corresponding distribution in the lower
panel. The samples are assigned a random scatter in the y-direction for the visualization.

of binary-star populations which aim to study outcomes such
as mergers between BHs and NSs do not sample from the
full range of initial conditions of stellar binaries. Such simulations ignore stars whose mass is too low to produce a BH
or NS, which is a simple form of importance sampling. The
normalisation of π actually used for the sampling is then
corrected to take this into account when predicting event
rates.
For each initial binary, xi , the final state of the binary yf is determined using the binary population synthesis
model u,
yf = u(xi ).

(2)

In many cases a simulation is run to study binaries that
evolve to a certain target subtype T , e.g., maybe T is the
population of binary black hole mergers. The following indicator function describes whether a binary yf is of interest:

1T (yf ) :=

(

1
0

if yf ∈ T (a hit)
if yf ∈
/ T (a miss),

(3)

which equals 1 if xi simulates to the target binary system
T (a hit) and zero if not (a miss). Combining equations (2)
& (3) gives the function
φ(xi ) := 1T (u(xi )),

(4)

which is a shorthand notation to describe whether an initially drawn binary evolved into a binary of the target population.
The samples from the initial parameter space that produced a binary of the target population (i.e., φ(xi ) = 1) can
then be given by the set
xT := (m1,T , m2,T , aT , . . .).

(5)

At the end of a simulation, the properties of the model
it has also been common to assume that the initial parameters are
independent of each other, e.g.,: π(xi ) = π(m1,i )· π(m2,i /m1,i )
·π(ai ) · . . ..
This assumption of separability may not be valid, as found by
Abt et al. (1990); Moe & Di Stefano (2017); Klencki et al. (2018).

population and the statistical uncertainties on those predicted properties can both be determined using the standard
Monte Carlo estimator (Fermi & Richtmyer 1948; Metropolis & Ulam 1949). For example, the relative formation rate
of the target population, RT , is estimated with
N

Eπ [RT ] ≈

1 X
φ(xi ),
N i=1

(6)

where N is the total number of samples used, E is the notation for the estimated mean and the subscript π in Eπ
denotes that the samples xi are distributed following the
birth distribution π (cf. Eq. 1). We shall refer to this relative formation rate, RT , throughout this section. Mathematically it is a fractional volume from the initial binary
parameter space, weighted by the probability of forming a
binary system at each part of that initial parameter space.
This quantity is not a physical rate, but gives a formation
rate for the population of interest as a fraction of the total
number of initial binary systems formed. So it only differs
from a true formation rate by a physical normalisation. We
consider it appropriately intuitive to keep referring to this
as a fractional, or relative, rate.
2.2

Adaptive sampling algorithm to increase
efficiency of simulation

Our algorithm consists of three main steps, as illustrated in
Fig. 1:
(I) Exploration
We first explore the parameter space by sampling directly
from the birth distribution π until eventually a sufficient
population of events of interest is found.
(II) Adaptation
We construct multivariate Gaussian distributions in the initial parameter space around each of the events of interest
found during the exploration phase. We scale the widths of
each of the Gaussians with the local sampling density. We
create the adapted sampling distribution q, from here on referred to as the instrumental distribution, by combining the
Gaussians into a mixture distribution.
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare events
(III) Refinement
We draw the samples for the remaining simulations from this
instrumental distribution. Each sample is assigned a weight
so that the predicted population appropriately reflects the
birth distribution π.
The rest of this subsection explains these steps in more detail.
2.2.1

The instrumental distribution

When the exploratory phase has ended, the set of binaries
of the target population xT (i.e., hits) contains NT,expl binaries that were found using a total of Nexpl samples. In the
STROOPWAFEL algorithm these samples are then used
to create an adapted instrumental distribution q(x), which
is focused around the areas in the initial parameter space
that produced the binaries of interest during the exploratory
phase. The remaining binaries are thereafter sampled from
this instrumental distribution. To obtain unbiased estimates
of the target population, weights wi are incorporated for
each sample as is standard in importance sampling
wi =

π(xi )
,
q(xi )

(7)

where π is the distribution of initial conditions, as given in
Eq. (1).
The instrumental distribution q(x) can be chosen to be
any probability distribution function, but a robust instrumental distribution is characterized by the following criteria:
• The weights wi are always finite and well defined. That is,
q(xi ) = 0 implies π(xi )φ(xi ) = 0 for all i.
• The instrumental distribution is efficient if q(x) is close to
the (unknown) target distribution of the binary population
synthesis study, i.e., when the instrumental distribution q(x)
is proportional to |φ(x)|π(x), as shown by Kahn & Marshall
(1953).
• It should be computationally inexpensive to generate random samples from q(x) as well as to calculate the probability
q(xi ) for each sample xi .
In order to achieve these properties the instrumental
distribution, q(x), in STROOPWAFEL is chosen to be a
mixture3 of NT,expl Gaussian distributions qk given by
q(x) =

1
NT,expl

NT,expl

X

qk (x; µk , Σk ),

(8)

k=1

where each qk contributes 1/NT,expl to the mixture distribution.
However, when drawing from q(x), some samples will
fall outside the physical range of the parameter space Ω (e.g.,

when drawing a binary with a negative stellar mass). Such
samples can immediately be rejected and redrawn. By doing so, we in practice sample from the normalized physical
mixture distribution
1
g =
q(x)
q(x) 1Ω (x)
(9)
(1 − Frej )
where 1Ω (x) is the indicator function that equals 1 when the
sample x lies in the physical range of the parameter space
and 0 if not. The factor Frej is the fraction of samples from
q(x) that are drawn outside of the physical parameter space.
The factor 1/(1 − Frej ) thus corrects for the normalization of
g It is computationally inexpensive to draw samples from
q(x).
g since Frej can be estimated once with a Monte Carlo
q(x)
simulation, and one can draw randomly from each Gaussian
qk (x) separately.
The Gaussian distributions qk (x; µk , Σk ) are
parametrized by their means µk and covariance matrices Σk . The covariance matrix, Σk , determines the
width of the Gaussian distributions. We adopt a diagonal
covariance matrix

 2
0
...
σ1,k


..
,
.
Σk = 
(10)

 0
..
2
.
σ
d,k

where d is the number of dimensions of the initial parameter
space.
We scale the width of each Gaussian, given by the covariance matrix Σk , with the average distance to the next
sampled binary xi in the initial parameter space, estimated
via the local density of the prior distribution π. This allows
the algorithm to construct broader Gaussian distributions
(i.e., with larger σk ) around previously found hits that lie
in the regions of the parameter space that are less densely
explored. If the one dimensional marginalised prior of the jth parameter is πj then the standard deviation σj,k is given
by:
σj,k = κ

In this context, “mixture” has a standard mathematical meaning. A sample drawn from q is drawn from each Gaussian qk with
a probability NT,expl instead of taking the sum of normally distributed samples. The sum of two jointly normally distributed
random variables will still have a normal distribution (even if the
means are not the same) whereas a mixture of two normally distributed variables will have two peaks (assuming the means are
far enough apart).
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

1
1/d

,

(11)

πj (xk )Nexpl

where Nexpl represents the number of samples used for the
exploration phase, the power 1/d scales this number to the
effective number of samples per dimension and the factor
πj (xk ) scales the width to the density of samples in the
exploration phase around the previously found hit xk . We
also introduce a free parameter, κ, that scales the widths of
the Gaussian distributions. This enables us to regulate how
tightly the mixture of Gaussian distributions covers the parameter space near the successful binaries xT . In this paper
we adopt κ = 2, which we chose following tests with a toy
model (for which, see Section 2.2.5 and Appendix B).
2.2.2

3

5

Combining samples from the exploratory phase and
refinement phase

It is desirable to make use of the samples from both the
exploration and refinement sampling phases. The optimal
way to achieve this is somewhat subtle. In principle this
could be done by merging the samples and weights into a
combined estimate (see Chapter 14 Robert & Casella 2013).
However, Veach & Guibas (1995), Hesterberg (1995), and

6

Broekgaarden et al.

later Owen & Zhou (2000) showed that using deterministic
multiple mixture weights is an efficient and robust way of
combining the samples. This approach uses the fact that the
combined samples from the exploratory phase and refined
sampling phase can be represented by a mixture sampling
distribution Q(x) from both phases
g
Q(x) = fexpl π(x) + (1 − fexpl )q(x),

(12)

where fexpl = Nexpl /N is the fraction of samples spent on
the exploratory phase. By analogy with Eq. (7), the weights
of all the N samples can be recalculated with
w
fi =

π(xi )
.
Q(xi )

(13)

This use of deterministic multiple mixture weights is not
fundamental to STROOPWAFEL. Our motivation for using deterministic multiple mixture weights is conservative,
to increase the stability against potential sampling artefacts.
One of the samples drawn from the importance function q(x)
may occasionally be extremely large. Such extreme weights
could remain so large as to be problematic when merging
the samples with the original weights wi – no matter how
efficient the sampling is in the exploratory phase (Cornuet
et al. 2012). Use of deterministic multiple mixture weights
suppresses this potential rare difficulty.
The multiple mixture weights approach ignores the distribution from which a given draw was sampled. This does
not affect the estimators for the predicted values, although
it does introduce a very small bias to the uncertainty estimators, which we confirmed to be negligible in our toy model
tests. Recalculating the weights in this way yields comparable or better estimates than those which are obtained when
merging the samples or using inverse-variance weighting for
our adaptive importance sampling algorithm. Indeed, He &
Owen (2014) derived a bound for the variance of the balance
heuristic for such estimators that combine samples from different distributions and found that this is an efficient way
of combining samples. See also sect. 3 in Veach & Guibas
(1995) and sect. 2 in Cornuet et al. (2012) for a more detailed discussion.
2.2.3

Calculating statistical estimates using the adaptive
distribution

At the end of each run the properties of the target population, such as the rate of formation RT of members of
the target population, and distribution functions of population observables, can be determined by standard Monte
Carlo estimates. Because we have drawn the samples from
a different distribution than the birth distribution we have
to incorporate weights to make sure that the estimators for
these quantities reflect the correct formation probabilities.
For example, the relative formation rate RT of the target
population within the simulation is estimated by the mean
N

RT ≈ EQ [RT ] =

1 X
φ(xi )f
wi .
N i=1

(14)

The uncertainty in this rate is represented by the variance
about the mean by
PN
2
]
s2Q [φ(x)w(x)]
fi 2
i φ(xi ) w
VQ [RT ] =
≈
− R2T .
(15)
N
N

symbol
u
xi
yf
T
xT
π(x)
Ω
q(x)
g
q(x)
N
Nexpl
Nref
NT
NT,expl
fexpl
κ
wi
w
fi

description
binary population synthesis model
initial state of a binary system
final state of a binary system
target subpopulation of binaries of interest
set of hits from the exploratory phase
distribution of the initial conditions
physical parameter range of the simulation
instrumental distribution
normalized instrumental distribution
total number of samples in the simulation
number of binaries in the exploratory phase
number of binaries in the refinement phase
number of systems of the target population
number of hits in the exploratory phase
fraction of samples in the exploration phase
scale factor for the widths of the Gaussians
statistical weight of sample xi
recomputed statistical weight

Table 1. Summary of the parameters that are used throughout
this paper. Hits refer to binaries of the chosen target population.

where sQ is the (sample) standard deviation for samples
drawn from the mixture sampling distribution Q(x). This
equation is known as the asymptotic variance. The other
moments or statistical estimates for the target population
can be similarly calculated.

2.2.4

The duration of the exploratory phase

An important choice in adaptive importance sampling algorithms is deciding when to switch from the exploratory phase
to the refinement phase. This choice can have a substantial
impact on the performance of the algorithm. Leaving the
exploratory phase too early can result in missing important
regions of the initial parameter space which produce systems in the target population. On the other hand, switching
to the refinement sampling phase too late will miss out on
the advantages of the algorithm, as most time will be spent
sampling from the birth distributions instead of the more
efficient adapted distribution.
A method often used in adaptive importance sampling
algorithms to determine the fraction of samples that should
be spent on exploringP
the parameter
P space is by using the effective sample size: ( k wk )2 / k (wk 2 ), (ESS, Hesterberg
1995; Liu 2008). This is a measure of efficiency and corresponds to the equivalent number of independent samples
drawn from the prior distribution. However, it can be difficult to know in advance what a good value for the ESS
should be. Instead, since STROOPWAFEL is a two-step
adaptive algorithm, we can directly derive a value for fexpl
by using the estimated rareness of the population, which we
self-consistently calculate during the exploration phase.
Here we estimate the optimal fraction fexpl of the total number of samples N that we should spend on the exploratory phase. The challenge is that we do not know in
advance how good our adaptive sampling distribution will
be. Here, as a simplified proxy for the imperfect sampling
distribution, we assume that the adaptive sampling distribution is determined sufficiently well that it perfectly matches
the target distribution over most of the parameter space, but
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare events
that a small region of the target parameter space could be
missing samples due to a limited number of samples drawn
during the exploratory phase, and thus have an adaptive
sampling probability of zero (see Appendix A for details).
In other words, we divide the volume of the input parameter space which successfully produces systems of interest into
two parts, one which we assume we have accurately found
and one which remains missing. We then find fexpl such that
the event rate uncertainty is minimised; specifically, we require that the contribution to the event rate from potentially
undiscovered islands is smaller than, or no worse than similar to, the sampling uncertainty in the rate contributed by
the islands which are successfully found.
We assume that we sample from the mixture distribution Q(x), and aim to estimate the rate RT with N total
samples. After simulating N samples we assume we have
identified a target binary forming region with total weight
z1 , whereas a region with weight z2 is yet undiscovered such
that the estimated rate of the target population is
unidentified

RT =

z1 +
|{z}

z}|{
z2

≈ EQ [RT ].

(16)

identified

The uncertainty on this rate estimate is described by the
variance, which we can approximate with (see Appendix A
for more details)


1 
z1
z2
VQ [RT ] ≈
+
− (z1 + z2 )2  .
N (1−fexpl ) + fexpl
fexpl
z1

(17)
The smallest uncertainty on the rate RT is obtained for
the value of fexpl where the variance VQ (RT ) is the lowest.
By taking the derivative of VQ with respect to fexpl , and
then finding the roots of the derivative, we find that this
minimum occurs at
√
√
z1 ( 1 − z1 − z2 )
p
.
(18)
fexpl = 1 − √
1 − z1 ( z2 (1 − z1 ) + z1 )
To make practical use of this during our simulations,
we need ongoing live estimates for z1 and z2 . For the region
which has been identified, we adopt z1 ≈ Eπ [RT ] during the
simulation using Eq. (14). We approximate the target pop1
ulation region that is yet undiscovered, z2 , by z2 ≈ (fexpl
.
N)
This represents the weight of stochastic sampling noise in
the exploratory phase when using a total of fexpl N samples.
Moreover, this choice of fexpl ensures that the estimated uncertainty on the rate estimate is always comparable or larger
than the uncertainty of missing a region, 1/fexpl N .
While the running estimate of z2 on the right hand side
of Eq. 18 is a function of fexpl , rather than explicitly solving
for fexpl , we choose to iteratively approach the optimal solution over the course of the exploratory phase. The resulting
fexpl is similar to the fexpl that is obtained if we had used
the dependency of z2 on fexpl when solving for the minimum
in Eq. 17.
We note that we have implicitly assumed that the adaptive sampling phase is perfectly efficient, i.e., that all the
draws in the adaptive sampling phase find a member of the
target output population. Here that is a conservative assumption, since a less-than-perfect efficiency will increase
the sampling uncertainty with respect to the known islands
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

7

(i.e., z1 ). Therefore, imperfect efficiency in the adaptive sampling phase decreases the chance that the uncertainty from
undiscovered islands is significant.
STROOPWAFEL internally uses Eq. 18 to estimate
fexpl . For clarity here, we can additionally assume that z1
and z2 are much smaller than 1, i.e., that the target population is a rare outcome of the initial conditions. Then we
obtain the simplified equation
z1
fexpl ≈ 1 −
(19)
√ .
z1 + z2
From this simplified equation it becomes clear that we
recover the intuitively correct limit for extremely rare events,
i.e. if z1 = EQ [RT ] → 0, we find fexpl → 1, which suggests
that we should spend all our simulation time on exploration,
as expected. On the other hand once we find at least 1 hit in
the exploratory phase we find fexpl 6= 1, and so the variance
of our rate estimate is expected to decrease when drawing
some of the samples from the adapted distribution, compared to taking all samples from the birth distribution.
Lastly, from Eq. 17 it also becomes
clear that fexpl ≈ 0.5
p
once we have found NT,expl ∼
Nexpl target binaries. In
other words, fexpl ∼ 1 if N 6 1/R2T and therefore the total
number of samples N should generally be similar to or larger
than 1/R2T .
2.2.5

Determining the free parameter κ from tests with a
toy model

We present results from the application of our method to
astrophysical simulations in Section 3. Here we explore the
methodology with a toy model to test the performance of the
algorithm and determine the value of the free parameter κ.
In principle κ = 1 could be adopted. Smaller values of κ will
increase the efficiency of the STROOPWAFEL algorithm,
but increase the chance of missing an important region of the
output surface because the Gaussian distributions qk are too
narrow and do not cover the output surface well. Excessively
large values of κ, meanwhile, will decrease the efficiency of
finding samples of interest in the refinement phase and lower
the gain of STROOPWAFEL. After performing tests with
a toy model, as described in Appendix B, we adopt the value
κ = 2.However, when applying STROOPWAFEL in higher
dimensions the optimal value for κ may well change.
2.2.6

Summary of STROOPWAFEL algorithm

The algorithm for STROOPWAFEL, combining the methods discussed in this section, is summarized in Algorithm 1.
2.3

Characteristic behaviour

Here we use the analytic derivations from Section 2.2 to illustrate the characteristics of our algorithm in idealised cases.
This is intended to help users of STROOPWAFEL understand the expected behaviour without needing to master the
details presented above.
Key variables for this illustration are:
• RT , the formation rate of the population under study. This
is expressed as the fraction of binaries, when drawn from
initial conditions following the birth probability distribution,
that yield target systems.

Broekgaarden et al.

(II) Adaptation:
17 set µ = xT ;
18 Calculate Σ by determining σj,k (xk ) for all
k = 1, ..., NT ;
19 This gives q(x; µ, Σ);
16

20

(III) Refinement:
22 while Nexpl 6 i 6 N do
23
i += 1;
24
draw new sample xi ∼ q(x; µ, Σ)1Ω (x);
25
evaluate sample yf = u(xi );
26 end
21

27

Post processing:
π(xi )
;
calculate Frej and mixture weights w
fi = Q(x
i)
30 calculate desired population quantities such as the
rate RT ;
28
29

• N , the total number of binary systems (i.e. samples) used
in a given population simulation, which is chosen by the
user.
• fexpl , the fraction of the total number of samples that
should optimally be spent on the exploration phase. This
is chosen automatically by STROOPWAFEL during the
exploration phase (see Sect. 2.2.4), when the algorithm estimates the formation rate RT .
Figure 2 presents derived quantities as a function of the
fractional rate of the target population RT . This Figure, and
Figure 3, include points representing simulated astrophysical
populations, specifically for different subsets of DCO mergers. These simulations are described further in Section 3.
The values from those simulations are included here to give
context to the analytic expectations for the performance of
STROOPWAFEL.
The top panel of Figure 2 shows the optimal fexpl ,
for simulations with a total number of samples of N =
104 , 105 , 106 and 107 . For a rarer target population, a larger
fraction of the total number of samples should be spent on
the exploratory phase. This is because it takes longer to
determine a good sampling distribution when RT is low.
A more common target population can be optimally sim-

more common
events

10−4
10−3
10−2
Rate of target population

100
tra

dit

10−1

10−2

BH–BH
ALL

0.0
10−5

BH–BH ≥ 50 M
BH–NS
NS–NS

0.2

ion

al u

nce

rta

inty

ST
uncROOP
erta WA
inty FE
L

10−3
10−5

10−1

N = 104

N = 106
10−4
10−3
10−2
Rate of target population

more common
events

15

0.4

BH–BH
ALL

end
14 end
13

0.6

NS–NS ≤ 50 Myr

4

NS–NS ≤ 50 Myr

(I) Exploration:
fexpl = 1;
5 while i/N 6 fexpl do
6
i += 1;
7
draw new sample xi ∼ π(x);
8
evaluate sample yf = u(xi );
9
if yf ∈ T then
10
counthits += 1;
11
xT ← xi (add hit to the found collection of
hits);
12
update estimate fexpl iteratively using Eq. 18
1
z1 = Eπ [RT ] and z2 = (fexpl
;
N)
3

0.8

BH–BH ≥ 50 M
BH–NS
NS–NS

2

N = 104
N = 105
N = 106
N = 107

more rare
events

i = 0;

more rare
events

1

1.0
Fraction exploratory phase fexpl

Algorithm 1: STROOPWAFEL algorithm

Fractional statistical uncertainty

8

10−1

Figure 2. Top panel: the fraction of total samples that should
be spent on the exploratory phase versus the fractional rate, RT ,
of the target population in a simulation. Different curves show
the effect of varying the total number of samples N in the simulation. Bottom panel: expected sampling uncertainty on the
predicted event rate versus the fractional rate, for two different
choices of N . The dashed lines show the expected
uncertainty
p
from ”traditional” Monte Carlo sampling (i.e., Vπ [RT ]/RT ).
The solid lines show the minimum possible statistical uncertainty
from STROOPWAFEL sampling, i.e., if the efficiency in the refinement phase is 1. In practice the statistical rate uncertainty
when using STROOPWAFEL will lie in the area shaded in grey.
All panels: coloured vertical bars indicate the fractional rate of
the target populations, and star symbols show the corresponding
values of these parameters, for the six simulations with N = 106
described in Section 3.

ulated with a relatively small exploratory phase, since we
expect this will be enough to build up a good adaptive distribution. STROOPWAFEL estimates RT during the exploration phase, when it samples from the birth probability
distribution and self-consistently calculates fexpl based on
the estimated RT and user-chosen N .
The bottom panel of Figure 2 shows the expected statistical uncertainty in the event rate predicted by the population simulation, for simulations with a total number of
samples of N = 104 and 106 . By statistical uncertainty we
mean the uncertainty that arises from using a finite number
of samples. In standard Monte Carlo simulation this is also
sometimes referred
√ to as Poisson error, given for traditional
sampling by 1/ NT . We estimate the
√ minimum STROOPWAFEL uncertainty in Fig. 2 as 1/ NT , where NT is now
the total number of objects of interest found jointly in the
exploration and refinement phases. The uncertainty as computed through Eq. 15 will be slightly greater, since the distriMNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

3

N = 106

more rare
events

102

more common
events

Gain

103

BH–BH
ALL

Efficiency of
refinement phase
1
0.1

NS–NS ≤ 50 Myr

104

BH–BH ≥ 50 M
BH–NS
NS–NS

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare events

101
10−5

10−4
10−3
10−2
Rate of target population

10−1

Figure 3. The ratio of the number of target binaries found with
STROOPWAFEL to the number found when Monte Carlo sampling from the birth distribution – i.e., the multiplicative gain
achieved by STROOPWAFEL – as a function of rareness of the
target population. The red curves give this gain for two different
efficiencies in the refinement phase, as labelled. The gain is shown
for simulations with a total of N = 106 samples. Coloured vertical
bars and star symbols present the values for the six simulations
described in Section 3, as given in the last column of Table 2.

bution of weights means that the effective sample size of the
target population is lower than NT . These analytic estimates
appear to be consistent with our numerical calculations (see
also Section 3.1).
This is not the physical uncertainty since the model
used for the simulation might still be wrong. In practice
the efficiency in the refinement phase will not be perfect,
i.e., not all samples drawn in that phase will find an outcome from the target population. So the expected uncertainty from STROOPWAFEL will lie in the shaded region
shown in Fig. 2. STROOPWAFEL efficiency gains will be
greatest for rare events and large N , allowing a greater fraction of time to be spent in the efficient refinement phase.
Comparisons to observational data will typically be
made using distribution functions of predicted quantities
(e.g., component masses), not just event rates. We later
demonstrate the improvements provided by our algorithm
for predictions of distribution functions. Nonetheless this
overall decrease in statistical rate uncertainty for fixed sample number in a simulation is indicative of the improvements
enabled by applying STROOPWAFEL to a target population.
Figure 3 shows the increase in the number of simulated binaries of interest versus traditional Monte Carlo sampling from a birth distribution for a simulation with fixed
N = 106 . The efficiency in the refinement phase is not known
in advance. We show predictions for a refinement phase efficiency of 1 and 0.1; as long as the total number of successful
samples is dominated by those drawn during the refinement
phase, the maximum possible gain is roughly proportional to
the refinement phase efficiency. The value for the efficiency
of the refinement phase varies between ∼ 3.4 · 10−2 and 3.7
·10−1 in our example astrophysical simulations (see Section
3 and Table 2).
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

9

RESULTS

In this section we demonstrate the power and advantages of
STROOPWAFEL. Our algorithm could be applied to many
sampling routines, but the illustration here uses the binary
population synthesis code COMPAS (Stevenson et al. 2017;
Barrett et al. 2018; Vigna-Gómez et al. 2018). The physical
assumptions and parameter settings we adopt are briefly
summarised in Appendix C.
We combine STROOPWAFEL and COMPAS to
model six different target populations. Four are simulations
of subtypes of DCOs that merge in a Hubble time: (1)
all DCO mergers (i.e., BH–NS, NS–NS and BH–BH), (2)
BH–BH mergers, (3) NS–NS mergers and (4) BH–NS mergers. Additionally we model two simulations of extremely
rare events by focusing on a subset of the above, namely
(5) BH–BH mergers with total system masses in excess of
mtot > 50M and (6) NS–NS mergers that merge within
tc 6 50 Myrs from the moment of the DCO formation (where
tc is the coalescence time). A summary of the results for
these simulations can be found in Table 2.
In this section we present detailed results from simulations 1–4, as these target populations are those most commonly discussed in the literature. We just present the key
findings for simulations 5 and 6. For each target population we compare a simulation using our sampling algorithm
to one which uses birth distribution Monte Carlo sampling,
which for conciseness we will typically call traditional sampling. Both the STROOPWAFEL and the traditional simulations sample N = 106 initial binaries.
The overall gain that is obtained when using STROOPWAFEL depends on the simulation and the initial efficiency
of the ‘traditional’ method that the algorithm is compared
with. For example, the choices for the initial parameter space
can change how much the sampling can be improved when
using STROOPWAFEL. We use settings that are commonly used in population synthesis studies of DCO mergers.
The remainder of the section is structured as follows. Section 3.1 demonstrates the increased efficiency of
STROOPWAFEL at finding binaries from the target population. Section 3.2 discusses how that increased efficiency
can be used to speed up simulations. Section 3.3 shows how
our algorithm produces better resolution of the target population. Section 3.4 describes how our sampling method leads
to smaller statistical uncertainties in predicted population
distribution functions. Section 3.5 shows how STROOPWAFEL becomes even more important for recovering tails
of distribution functions and when considering observational
bias. Section 3.6 discusses how STROOPWAFEL handles
well the bifurcations and discontinuities in the binary population synthesis parameter space.

3.1

On the gain of generating binaries of the
target distribution

We find that the number of binaries of these target populations increases by factors of about 25 – 200 when using our
STROOPWAFEL sampling algorithm compared to simulations with traditional sampling. The panels in Fig. 4 showcase this by presenting the number of systems formed from
the target population as a function of total number of sampled binaries, for both our sampling method and traditional

Broekgaarden et al.

NT

ALL mergers

BH-BH mergers

y

t

tud
his s

10 5 0.3% uncertainty

s
this

10 4 1% uncertainty

gain: ×35

10 4 1% uncertainty

gain: ×53

nal

traditio

10 3 3% uncertainty
0.1

exploratory phase

0.2

0.4

refinement phase

Nbinaries ( × 10 6 )

nal
traditio

10 3 3% uncertainty

0.6

0.8 1

0.1

BH-NS mergers

exploratory phase

0.2

0.4

Nbinaries ( × 10 6 )

thi

NT

10 4 1% uncertainty

gain: ×45

10 3 3% uncertainty

traditional

traditional

0.6

0.8 1

tudy
this s

dy
s stu

gain: ×39

10 3 3% uncertainty
exploratory phase

0.6

10 5 0.3% uncertainty

10 4 1% uncertainty

0.4

refinement phase

NS-NS mergers

10 5 0.3% uncertainty

NT

tudy

10 5 0.3% uncertainty

NT

10

refinement phase

Nbinaries ( × 10 6 )

0.8

1

0.4

exploratory phase

0.6

refinement phase

Nbinaries ( × 10 6 )

0.8

1

Figure 4. The number of simulated binaries NT falling into the target population as a function of the total number of binaries Nbinaries
sampled for the traditional sampling method (gray dashed line) and the sampling method presented in this study (solid coloured line).
The four panels show the simulations for each of the four target sub-populations. In each panel the duration of the exploratory phase is
shown with a hashed gray area. In the background the standard Poisson fractional uncertainties of 0.3, 1 and 3% are shown with dashed
lines.

birth distribution Monte Carlo sampling. For these four target populations the gains are between ∼35–55. For the two
additional extremely rare target populations we find gains
of 24 and 203. The gains are also shown in the last column
of Table 2, and Figure 3.
At the beginning of each simulation, during the
STROOPWAFEL exploratory phase, the two sampling
methods produce similar number of binaries of interest (i.e.,
hits), only different by random chance. The duration of
that exploratory phase is determined by fexpl , as derived
in Section 2.2.4. For our simulated target populations, using
N = 106 samples, fexpl ranges between ≈ 0.2 and 0.8 (see
fexpl in Table 2). The algorithm then switches to the more
focused refinement phase, using the information from the
hits found during the exploratory phase. During this refinement phase our sampling algorithm is 45 – 650 times more
efficient at finding hits (see the sixth column in Table 2).

The difference in efficiency gains between the populations originates mostly from two effects. First, the different
rarenesses of the target populations (e.g., for these assumptions BH–NS mergers are more rarely produced than BH–
BH mergers) influences how much the efficiency increases
during the refinement phase and also the duration of the exploratory phase. Both are important factors for determining
the overall gain in efficiency. Second, the structure of the output surfaces influences how well the Gaussian mixture distribution covers the regions of interest in the output space.
A more stochastic or discontinuous output space (e.g., many
small islands of hits) will lead to smaller efficiencies in the
refinement phase of STROOPWAFEL. This effect is most
noticeable in the different gains between the BH–BH systems with total masses over 50 M and the NS–NS systems
that merge within 50 Myrs. Supernova remnants receive a
random natal kick in our simulations. These kicks induce
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

nr

Target subpopulation

fexpl

1
2
3
4
5
6

All DCO mergers in a Hubble time
BH–BH mergers in a Hubble time
BH–NS mergers in a Hubble time
NS–NS mergers in a Hubble time
BH–BH mergers mtot > 50 M
NS–NS mergers with tc 6 50 Myr

0.23
0.27
0.66
0.59
0.69
0.77

efficiency
exploratory
6.78 · 10−3
5.25 · 10−3
6.36 · 10−4
9.03 · 10−4
5.45 · 10−4
3.43 · 10−4

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare events

11

efficiency
refinement
3.05 · 10−1
3.69 · 10−1
7.38 · 10−2
9.71 · 10−2
3.55 · 10−1
3.38 · 10−2

gain
overall
35×
53×
39×
45×
203×
24×

gain
refinement
45×
70×
116×
108×
651×
99×

NT
traditional
6.71 · 103
5.16 · 103
6.55 · 102
8.93 · 102
5.44 · 102
3.32 · 102

NT
STROOPWAFEL
2.35 · 105
2.71 · 105
2.55 · 104
4.00 · 104
1.10 · 105
7.95 · 103

Table 2. Summary of the results from six target populations that are modelled in this paper to demonstrate our STROOPWAFEL
algorithm. We list the fraction of samples spent in the exploratory phase, fexpl , and the efficiency of finding ‘hits’ in the exploratory
and refinement phases. The gain in refinement is the ratio between the efficiency of finding samples of the target population during the
refinement phase of STROOPWAFEL and traditional sampling (where the efficiency of traditional sampling is equal to the efficiency
of the STROOPWAFEL exploratory phase). NT,traditional and NT,STROOPWAFEL represent the total number of systems of interest
that are found by the end of the simulation (using a total of 106 samples). The last column is the overall gain that we found when
using STROOPWAFEL compared to traditional Monte Carlo sampling from the birth distributions, which is defined by the ratio
NT,STROOPWAFEL / NT,traditional . 

stochastic and discontinuous behaviour into the output surfaces, leading to lower refinement-phase efficiency and gain.
The kicks are typically larger for NSs than BHs, and so affect NS–NS simulations the most. Conversely, the gain is
greatest for the BH–BH merger populations which are least
affected by these stochastic kicks (as shown in Figs. 2 and
3).
The largest overall gain shown in Table 2, and Fig. 3 is
for modelling a BH–BH population with total mass over 50
M . For this population it would be possible to increase the
efficiency of Monte Carlo sampling from the birth distributions by making thoughtful changes to the boundaries of the
initial parameter space, so the factor of ≈200 improvement
we show for STROOPWAFEL is higher than would arise
when comparing to more carefully-targeted use of standard
Monte Carlo sampling in this case. However, well-informed
choices in the initial parameter space would also benefit
STROOPWAFEL by increasing the efficiency of the initial exploration phase. Moreover, one-dimensional cuts to
the parameter space would become increasingly inefficient
when sampling in higher dimensions. STROOPWAFEL automatically finds the regions of interest, and avoids the risk
of incorrect choices in restricting the initial parameter space.
The increase in the number of events decreases the sampling uncertainty in the predicted event rates. Although the
standard uncertainty from Poisson noise decreases with the
square
√ root of the number of target systems found, i.e., as
1/ NT , in our weighted sampling case it also depends on
the variance in the weights (see Eq. 15). We find that our
sampling algorithm results in ≈ 3 – 10.5 times smaller sampling uncertainties compared to traditional sampling for the
same total of samples N = 106 . This is presented in Figure 5, which shows the fractionalpstatistical uncertainty estimate on the rate estimate, i.e., V[RT ]/E[RT ] from each
simulation.

3.2

Speeding up simulations

Instead of using STROOPWAFEL to obtain more information from a simulation with the same number of samples, one could alternatively aim for a certain precision in
the predicted event rates. In that case STROOPWAFEL
can be used to speed up the simulation, since this precision will be reached using a fraction of the number of samMNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

Figure 5. Sampling uncertainty estimate from each simulation of
the target population. Gray bars show the uncertainty from traditional sampling methods whereas the coloured bars show the
uncertainty from our sampling method STROOPWAFEL. All
simulations use a total of 106 samples. The number shown on
top of the traditional bar shows the factor in decrease in uncertainty from STROOPWAFEL compared to traditional sampling
for that simulation. 

ples required when using traditional sampling. Traditional
sampling would require 25 – 200 more simulations than
STROOPWAFEL to achieve the same number of target
binaries, and a factor of around 10 – 100 times more simulations to achieve the same rate estimate precision (these
speed-up factors differ because the statistical uncertainty depends on the variance in the weights as well as the number
of target samples).
The speed-up factor further depends on the computational cost of simulating samples from the chosen distribution. It might be that the binaries of interest require more or
less computational time than other binaries. Therefore the

12

Broekgaarden et al.

speed-up when using the adaptive distribution Q depends on
the science case of interest. In the simulations performed for
this study the average computational cost (in CPU time)
of simulating typical individual binaries sampled from the
adaptive distribution Q was up to a factor of 2 smaller than
for individual binaries sampled from the birth distribution.
Therefore, the total speed-up was up to another factor of 2
larger in our simulations than from more efficient sampling
alone.
More generally, we note that the gain or relative speedup from using STROOPWAFEL will depend on the target population and the traditional method with which it is
compared. First of all, the speed up from STROOPWAFEL
will generally be greater (smaller) if the target population
is more (less) rare. This is shown in Fig. 3. Equivalently, if
one chooses a larger initial parameter space (e.g. sampling
m1,i from [1, 150] M instead of m1,i from [5, 150] M used
here), the gain would have been larger as the event of interest
becomes rarer (assuming no binaries in the extended range
form a binary of the target population). Secondly, in some
binary population synthesis studies the primary mass is sampled uniformly in log m1,i space. This is a form of importance sampling. The gain of using STROOPWAFEL (with
uniform sampling in log m1,i during the exploratory phase)
could be lower than gains without this importance sampling
if importance sampling makes the traditional Monte Carlo
more efficient. Nevertheless, we would still expect a significant gain from STROOPWAFEL - especially if using that
form of importance sampling in the exploratory phase significantly decreases the duration of this phase.

3.3

Mapping the parameter space with higher
resolution

The increase in computational efficiency from STROOPWAFEL leads to finding substantially more events of the
target population which naturally enables a much higher
resolution mapping of both the input and output parameter
spaces. Figures 6 and 7 show examples of how the parameter space is explored in far greater detail using our sampling
method compared to traditional birth distribution Monte
Carlo sampling.
Figure 6 shows the location of the target population in
the initial parameter space of primary mass m1,i and separation log ai at birth. With our sampling method we obtain
more detailed contours and more contour levels that map the
initial parameter space with higher resolution. This leads to
better knowledge of the initial conditions of a binary system
that yield a binary of the target population. Physically the
structures seen in the input parameter space correspond to
the assumed physics of the different formation channels leading to compact-object mergers. More details are discussed in
Stevenson et al. (2017); Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018).
Meanwhile, Fig. 7 shows the higher resolution mapping
from STROOPWAFEL for the output space of the final
masses of the compact objects m1,f and m2,f in each DCO.
We plot on top the gravitational-wave events found from O1
and O2 data from The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al.

(2018) and Zackay et al. (2019)4 . The simulations with our
STROOPWAFEL algorithm again yield higher resolutions
and more systems of the target populations in the regions
overlapping with the observations. This is important in order
to compare observations and theory and test the physical
assumptions in our models.
Figure 7 shows that even in the STROOPWAFEL simulation, there are relatively few samples consistent with
the 90% credible regions for some of the highest mass
gravitational-wave events observed in O1 and O2. The samples shown here are not weighted for the sensitivity of
gravitational-wave interferometers. In addition, they correspond to a particular model chosen in our simulation, and
in practice many variations of this model need to be explored for a meaningful comparison with observations (e.g.,
Barrett et al. 2018). For example, the metallicity in this
model is fixed to Z = 0.001 and we expect to form more
massive black holes at lower metallicities (e.g., Spera et al.
2015; Belczynski et al. 2016; Neijssel et al. 2019). In addition, the most massive BH–BH mergers may have formed
through a different formation channel than the classical isolated binary evolution via the common-envelope phase which
is simulated with COMPAS. One example of such a different formation channel is chemically homogeneous evolution,
explored by Mandel & de Mink (2016); de Mink & Mandel
(2016); Marchant et al. (2016). Another example is dynamical formation of BH–BH mergers in a dense stellar environment (see Mandel & Farmer 2018; Mapelli 2018 for reviews).
Another possible explanation is that some of these highestmass events are instead from instrumental origin as they also
have a relatively high false-alarm-rate (The LIGO Scientific
Collaboration et al. 2018; Zackay et al. 2019).
The BH–NS and NS–NS panels in Fig. 7 show discontinuities in the NS remnant mass, with obvious gaps in the
NS mass range. This is a consequence of discontinuities in
the delayed Fryer et al. (2012) model describing the mapping from the carbon–oxygen core mass to the remnant (NS)
mass, which is used in the Fiducial COMPAS model. Although such discontinuities may be physical, this mapping
does not reproduce the mass distribution of Galactic NS–
NS binaries (Vigna-Gómez et al. 2018). For the purposes of
this paper, our main message is how such features in model
populations can be clarified by improved sampling.
3.4

Smaller variances in distribution functions

The most important consequence of the increase in sampling
efficiency enabled by STROOPWAFEL is that it leads to
a significant decrease in the statistical uncertainty of the
predictions for the output parameter spaces. That is, it improves the precision in the predicted population observables.
Figure 8 illustrates this improvement. The left panel in
Fig. 8 shows the number of binaries of the target population
NT found within a certain chirp mass bin for the BH–NS
simulation. The chirp mass mchirp = (m1,f m2,f )3/5 /(m1,f +
m2,f )1/5 is a combination of the masses of the DCOs that
is particularly accurately measured with gravitational-wave
observations. For the same histogram bin widths, i.e., the

4

Publicly available data can be found at https://www.
gw-openscience.org/catalog/GWTC-1-confident/html/.
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare events
m1,i [M ]
20

m1,i [M ]

40

60

100

140

2.5

2.51

0.0
−0.5
1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

log10 m1,i [M ]

log10 ai [AU]

log10 Nx / ∆S

0.5

3.69
3.29

1.0

2.9

0.5

2.51

2.11

0.0

2.11

1.72

−0.5

1.72

1.33

−1.0

2.0

100

1.33

0.8

1.0

140

2.5

1.2

1.4

3.36

1.5

3.01

0.5

2.65

0.0
−0.5
1.6

1.8

3.72

∆S

3.36

0.5

2.65

2.29

0.0

2.29

1.94

−0.5

1.94

1.58

−1.0

1.58

1.2

1.4

1.6

2.55

0.5

2.21

0.0
−0.5
1.5

log10 m1,i [M ]

1.6

1.7

3.24
2.89

1.0

2.55

0.5

2.21

1.86

0.0

1.86

1.52

−0.5

1.52

1.18

−1.0

1.8

1.18

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

20

7

2.5

log10 m1,i [M ]

2.0

3.36

1.5

1.0

3.01

0.5

2.65

0.0
−0.5
0.9

1.0

1.1

log10 m1,i [M ]

1.2

1.3

1.4

log10 ai [AU]

log10 ai [AU]

3.72

log10 Nx / ∆S

∆S

0.8

10

1.6

1.7

1.8

20
4.08

STROOPWAFEL

NS-NS mergers (893)

2.0

−1.0

1.5

2.5

4.08

1.5

1.4

m1,i [M ]

10

Traditional

BH-NS mergers (25488)

∆S

m1,i [M ]
7

60
3.58

1.5

log10 ai [AU]

log10 Nx / ∆S

log10 ai [AU]

1.0

1.4

40

2.0

2.89

1.3

20
STROOPWAFEL

3.24

1.2

2.0

2.5

BH-NS mergers (655)

∆S

1.1

1.8

log10 m1,i [M ]

10
3.58

1.0

BH-BH mergers (271067)

3.01

60

2.0

−1.0

140

log10 Nx / ∆S

40

2.5

1.5

100

m1,i [M ]

20
Traditional

60

4.08

m1,i [M ]
10

2.0

1.0

2.0

log10 m1,i [M ]

log10 ai [AU]

2.0

log10 Nx / ∆S

log10 ai [AU]

3.72

1.0

1.4

40

STROOPWAFEL

∆S

1.2

1.8

2.5

BH-BH mergers (5163)

2.0

−1.0

1.6

log10 m1,i [M ]

20
4.08

1.5

ALL mergers (234768)

m1,i [M ]

60

Traditional

140

log10 Nx / ∆S

40

100

∆S

m1,i [M ]
20

60

4.08

1.5

3.29
2.9

0.8

40

2.0

3.69

∆S

1.0

−1.0

20

STROOPWAFEL

ALL mergers (6711)

2.0
1.5

10

2.5

4.08

Traditional

log10 ai [AU]

7

log10 Nx / ∆S

10

NS-NS mergers (40021)
3.72

∆S

3.36

log10 Nx / ∆S

7

13

1.0

3.01

0.5

2.65

2.29

0.0

2.29

1.94

−0.5

1.94

1.58

−1.0

1.58

0.8

0.9

1.0

1.1

log10 m1,i [M ]

1.2

1.3

1.4

Figure 6. Contour plots of the locations in log m1,i and log ai space of the hits xT (i.e., binaries of the target population) found in each
simulation when using traditional birth distribution Monte Carlo sampling (left panels) and the sampling method STROOPWAFEL
developed in this study (right panels). Contours represent a constant density of binaries of the target population found per unit area
in log m1,i – log ai space. The colour gradient indicates the number of samples per area ∆S, the size of which is shown with a black
rectangle. If the density is below the level of our lowest contour we plot the individual points. The four different panels from top to
MNRAS
000, 1–22
(2019)
bottom represent
the
first four target populations shown in Table 2. The total number of hits NT found in each simulation is quoted in
parentheses. The metallicity assumed in all simulations is Z = 0.001.

Broekgaarden et al.
50

4.4

4.4

STROOPWAFEL

ALL mergers(6711)

ALL mergers (234768)

3.93

3.93

∆S

∆S

40

3.01

2.54

20

m2,f [M ]

30

3.47

log Nx / ∆S

m2,f [M ]

3.47

30

3.01

2.54

20

2.08

10

2.08

10

1.61

1.61

1.15

10

20

30

40

50

1.15

60

10

20

30

m1,f [M ]

50

60

m1,f [M ]

50

50

3.6

Traditional

40

3.6

STROOPWAFEL

BH-BH mergers (5163)

BH-BH mergers (271067)

3.25

3.25

∆S

40

∆S

40

2.55

2.2

20

m2,f [M ]

30

2.9

log Nx / ∆S

m2,f [M ]

2.9

30

2.55

2.2

20

1.85

10

1.85

10

1.5

1.5

1.15

10

20

30

40

50

1.15

60

10

20

30

m1,f [M ]

3.4

STROOPWAFEL

BH-NS mergers (655)

2.75

3.12

∆S
2.50

2.25
2.55

2.00
2.27

1.75

m2,f [M ]

2.83

log Nx / ∆S

m2,f [M ]

2.50

1.25
1.00
10

15

20

25

30

35

2.83

2.25
2.55

2.00
2.27

1.75

1.99

1.50

1.99

1.50

1.71

1.25

1.42

1.00

40

1.71

1.42

5

10

15

m1,f [M ]

2.92

1.75
2.46

1.50
1.25

2.00

2.25

2.50

2.75

3.00

m2,f [M ]

3.39

2.00

log Nx / ∆S

m2,f [M ]

2.25

m1,f [M ]

40

NS-NS mergers (40021)
4.33

∆S

2.50

3.86

1.75

35

2.75

4.33

∆S

1.50

30

4.8

STROOPWAFEL

NS-NS mergers (893)

2.75
2.50

25

3.00

4.8

Traditional

20

m1,f [M ]

3.00

1.25

BH-NS mergers (25488)

2.75

3.12

∆S

1.00
1.00

60

3.00

3.4

5

50

m1,f [M ]

3.00
Traditional

40

log Nx / ∆S

40

log Nx / ∆S

Traditional

log Nx / ∆S

50

3.86

2.25
3.39

2.00
2.92

1.75
2.46

1.50

1.99

1.25

1.52

1.00
1.00

log Nx / ∆S

14

1.99

1.52

1.25

1.50

1.75

2.00

2.25

2.50

2.75

3.00

m1,f [M ]

Figure 7. Similar to Figure 6 but now for the output parameters: the final compact object masses m1,f and m2,f of the DCO. We
overplot the gravitational-wave observations from O1 and O2 from The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al. (2018) in black and from
Zackay et al. (2019) in red. Error bars indicate 90% credible regions around the median. The metallicity assumed in all simulations is
Z = 0.001; selection effects of gravitational-wave detectors are not accounted for.
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare events
same DCO chirp mass resolution, our improved sampling
leads to more binaries of the target distribution per bin,
and hence yields smaller fractional sampling uncertainties
for each histogram bin. This is shown in the right panel
of Fig. 8, which displays the normalised chirp mass distributions from traditional and STROOPWAFEL sampling.
The error bars showing the statistical sampling uncertainty
on each bin are much smaller for our sampling algorithm,
leading to better predictions for the distribution functions.

3.5

Recovering tails of distribution functions

The need for more efficient sampling algorithms in binary population synthesis simulations of gravitational-wave
source progenitors becomes even more evident when we consider the observational biases of gravitational-wave detectors. These biases, which generally favour high-mass systems
with greater gravitational-wave amplitudes, over-emphasise
the rare and frequently under-sampled tails of the simulated distributions. An example is shown in Fig. 9, where
we plot the predicted distribution of chirp masses for BH–
NS systems estimated using traditional birth distribution
Monte Carlo or by using the STROOPWAFEL algorithm.
The shown distributions are weighted by the sensitivity of
gravitational-wave interferometers, approximated as a bias
dependent on the primary DCO mass ∝ m2.2
1,f (Fishbach
& Holz 2017). We also show 1- and 2–σ confidence intervals which are calculated by bootstrapping the samples 1000
times. Our algorithm produces much smoother distribution
predictions with much smaller sampling uncertainties compared to traditional sampling methods for the same number
of samples simulated. In particular, Figure 9 demonstrates
that simulations using the traditional Monte Carlo sampling
from the birth distributions under-sample the high-mass end
of the population. This will be particularly significant when
comparing population models to observations.
Figure 9 corresponds to a particular model choice; variations of the model have to be considered in order to compare
with observations. The displayed distribution is from a simulation at a single metallicity of Z = 0.001, while a range of
metallicities will contribute to the observed BH–NS merger
population. An integration over the metallicity-dependent
cosmic star formation history is therefore required. The
properties of BH–NS mergers will be explored with COMPAS in future work.

3.6

Handling bifurcations and stochasticity

One of the most important results is that our sampling algorithm STROOPWAFEL handles well the bifurcations and
stochasticity that naturally occur in the parameter spaces of
binary population synthesis simulations. This discontinuous
behaviour is visible in Figs. 6 and 7 by the disconnected contours and the offset of the location of some individual points
from those contours. Such offset points physically relate to
extremely rare formation channels or tails of distribution
functions, while the ridges in the birth parameter space relate to bifurcations in the fate of the binary. Not only does
STROOPWAFEL recover the irregularly shaped structures
in the parameter space, our algorithm also finds these more
scattered points.
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

4

15

DISCUSSION

We have demonstrated that the performance of STROOPWAFEL is substantially superior to traditional Monte Carlo
sampling from the birth probability distributions. For the
types of rare events simulated in Section 3, the gain is already so large that the current implementation of our algorithm can contribute to drastic speed-ups of binary population synthesis simulations. Hence we have postponed some
natural improvements to STROOPWAFEL until later, but
we discuss them here. After those, we discuss additional potential applications for our algorithm.
4.1

The exploratory phase

During the exploratory phase in STROOPWAFEL the initial parameter space is sampled by drawing random binaries
from the priors (as in traditional birth distribution Monte
Carlo sampling) until Nexpl events of interest are found.
There are several features of the exploratory phase that
could be optimised and improved.
• We now use sampling from the birth distribution π for
drawing the random binaries in the exploratory phase. Future improvements of STROOPWAFEL could use more efficient sampling algorithms in the exploratory phase. Examples include (1) using importance sampling in the exploratory phase when there is an existing guess at a more efficient sampling distribution, or (2) implementing techniques
such as Latin hypercube sampling (LHS, McKay et al. 1979;
Eglajs & Audze 1977; Iman et al. 1980, 1981). LHS is a
Monte Carlo method that generates near-random samples
which are more equally distributed throughout the initial
parameter space by placing only one sample in each row
and column of the Latin square5 . By doing so, it could improve the sampling in the exploratory phase as the probability of the randomly drawn samples being clustered decreases
slightly.
• The duration of the exploratory phase is now determined
with fexpl , which is optimised for the uncertainties on the
rates of the target distribution. A future improvement would
be to determine fexpl based on the uncertainty in the simulated output distribution function. See also Sect. 4.3.
• The exploratory phase duration is optimised under the simplifying assumption that the instrumental distribution will
match the target distribution except for some missing regions in parameter space. The optimisation could also consider the level of fluctuation in the instrumental sampling
distribution (i.e., the variance in the weights).
• If the structures in the parameter space have a known minimum volume, we could use this to derive a better informed
estimate for the uncertainty contributing from the probability of missing such structures in the exploratory phase. This
seems unlikely to apply to binary-star population synthesis,
but might be relevant for other applications of STROOPWAFEL.

5

A Latin square of order n is an arrangement of n different
variables in a n × n array such that each variable occurs exactly
once in every row or column (Euler 1782).

16
104

Broekgaarden et al.
BH-NS mergers

0.5

5% uncertainty/bin

102

BH-NS mergers
STROOPWAFEL (25488)
Traditional (655)

0.4

103

p(mchirp) / M

Number of hits NT

STROOPWAFEL (25488)
Traditional (655)

10% uncertainty/bin

25% uncertainty/bin

0.3

0.2

101
0.1

50% uncertainty/bin

100

2

3

4

5

6

0.0

mchirp [M ]

2

3

4

5

6

mchirp [M ]

Figure 8. Left panel: histograms of the number of target BH–NS binaries NT found per chirp mass bin mchirp for traditional Monte
Carlo sampling (grey) and the STROOPWAFEL sampling method presented in this study (green). The standard Monte Carlo fractional
uncertainties (i.e. Poisson noise) are shown with dashed lines in the background. We mark everything below 4 events (i.e. 50% uncertainty)
as statistically insignificant as it is consistent with no hits within 2 standard deviations. Right panel: the BH-NS chirp mass probability
distribution; STROOPWAFEL results have been re-sampled with weights from Eq. (13). The metallicity assumed in the simulations is
Z = 0.001. The bin width is approximately 0.2M and is constant between the traditional and STROOPWAFEL algorithm. 

4.2

The refined sampling phase

The Gaussians which are used to form the instrumental distribution are currently constructed using diagonal covariances (Σk ). These then remain unchanged throughout the
refinement phase of adaptive importance sampling – even
though much more information becomes available about the
distribution of hits in the initial parameter space. A potential future improvement is to update the instrumental sampling distribution during the refinement phase. In principle
this might be done locally, with only the samples drawn
from each of the individual Gaussians used to update the
corresponding element of the instrumental distribution. Doing so would avoid a potentially expensive nearest-neighbour
search, as the tree is automatically built for free by the
sampling already being performed. See also for example the
AMIS algorithm described in Cornuet et al. (2012). Adaptive
distribution choices beyond a mixture of Gaussians could
also be explored.

4.3

Adapting to uncertainty in distribution
functions

Observational selection effects must be applied to model predictions in order to statistically compare models against observations. These selection effects are generally applied after
population synthesis models are generated, and may place
significant weight on rarely-formed systems in the tails of
output distribution functions (e.g., higher-mass DCO binaries). Even though STROOPWAFEL can greatly improve
the overall number of systems produced from a simulation,
there may still be relatively few systems in these tails.
In principle, we could tune STROOPWAFEL to produce a model population weighted towards any observational
population distribution, i.e., optimising for observational selection effects and spending less time on systems which do

not contribute to the observed sample. This can be achieved
by incorporating selection effects directly in the instrumental distribution rather than applying them to STROOPWAFEL outputs. This can be practically implemented by
changing the instrumental distribution weights. At the moment all Gaussians contribute equally to the mixture distribution with a weight 1/NT,expl but instead the contribution
of each Gaussian can be weighted with the probability of observing the system to focus the simulation on systems that
are more likely to contribute to the observable population.
An extreme example of this approach would be re-defining
the target population to be an even rarer subset of the initial target population, e.g., tails of a distribution function.
STROOPWAFEL could also be used to sample from regions of the initial parameter space giving rise to properties
consistent with specific observed systems (see also Andrews
et al. 2018).
The current implementation of STROOPWAFEL
might be thought of as something like adaptive mesh refinement, familiar from hydrodynamics, applied to the phase
space of binary population synthesis. This potential future development of STROOPWAFEL would be refining
in the space of predicted observables. This development of
STROOPWAFEL could naturally be applied to modelling
any population for comparison to observations, not only intrinsically rare populations.

4.4

STROOPWAFEL in higher dimensions

The demonstrations in this paper have all used STROOPWAFEL to sample in a three-dimensional birth parameter space of the two component masses and the initial orbital separation. STROOPWAFEL can be readily applied
to sample in more dimensions. The scaling parameter κ may
well have a different optimal value for higher dimensions,
and should be investigated before being applied to higher
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare events

0.8

BH-NS mergers

0.7

STROOPWAFEL (25488)
Traditional (655)

17

p(mchirp) / M

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

2

3

4

5

6

mchirp [M ]
Figure 9. Predicted distribution of the chirp mass of the merging BH–NS population using STROOPWAFEL (green) and traditional
(grey) sampling. In both cases the simulation uses N = 106 samples and the distributions are weighted by the sensitivity of gravitationalwave interferometers using Fishbach & Holz (2017). Shaded regions show the 1- and 2–σ confidence intervals which are calculated by
bootstrapping the samples 1000 times. This distribution is for a particular set of model assumptions, including a single metallicity
Z = 0.001, and an integration over a metallicity-dependent cosmic star formation history is required for comparisons with observations.
The same scipy kernel density estimator smoothing with a dimensionless kernel density estimator factor of about 0.1 is used for traditional
and STROOPWAFEL distributions (see also Appendix D).

dimensions, although we anticipate moving away from using diagonal covariances (see subsection 4.2). Additional potential dimensions to add to the space of initial conditions
include, e.g., initial compositions, the initial eccentricity of
the system, or the spins of the stars. Moreover, in COMPAS
systems are labelled from the start with vectors representing normalised versions of the supernova kicks that will be
applied during compact-object formation (see also, e.g., Andrews et al. 2018); each kick adds three dimensions to the
parameter space. Potentially, applying STROOPWAFEL
to the kick vectors can be promising since the kick magnitudes and directions can significantly affect the fates of the
systems. In our simulations this would be especially important to increase the gain in simulating NS–NS mergers, as
the kicks contribute most to the current stochastic output
surfaces for this target population.

4.5

Combining STROOPWAFEL with MCMC or
Gaussian process regression emulators on
continuous spaces

STROOPWAFEL could be applied directly to the combined parameter space of initial parameters of an individual
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

system (e.g., the initial masses and separations) and hyperparameters describing the model assumptions (e.g., winddriven mass loss rates, common-envelope physics).
Alternatively, STROOPWAFEL could be combined
with other methods for exploring the parameter space, such
as emulators based on Gaussian process regression (see, e.g.,
Barrett et al. 2017; Taylor & Gerosa 2018). Some of the parameters map continuously to the output space, while others exhibit discontinuities. STROOPWAFEL distinguishes
itself in handling bifurcations and stochastic output surfaces. On the other hand, emulators can be more efficient
in sampling parameters that are smooth. Thus an intended
future development is to combine STROOPWAFEL with
such methods to obtain the best overall efficiency.
STROOPWAFEL output samples could also be converted into probability distributions using Gaussian mixture
models based on Dirichlet processes (Del Pozzo et al. 2018).

5

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

We have presented a new sampling algorithm that aims to
improve the efficiency of simulating rare events in astrophys-

18

Broekgaarden et al.

ical populations, and demonstrated its utility for binary population synthesis of gravitational-wave merger populations.
Our algorithm STROOPWAFEL adaptively improves the
sampling distribution to focus more computational time on
the target population. Some key findings of our investigation
are:
(i) Using STROOPWAFEL we find a factor of about 25–
200× more systems of interest in simulations of a certain
length, as compared to Monte Carlo sampling from the
birth distributions. To simulate the same number of events
of interest with such commonly-used Monte Carlo sampling
would require up to two orders of magnitude more computational time. This gain will improve binary population
synthesis simulations by making it computationally feasible
both to include more details of the relevant massive-star
physics and to explore a greater number of variations of the
physical assumptions of the model.
(ii) The increase in efficiency of STROOPWAFEL leads to
higher-resolution mapping of both the input and output
parameter space. This reduces the sampling uncertainty
by factors of ≈ 3 to 10 for our simulations with 106 total
samples.
(iii) STROOPWAFEL improvements are particularly significant when simulating extremely rare events or tails of
distribution functions, such as the most massive BH-BH
mergers or early NS-NS mergers.
(iv) One of the core strengths of STROOPWAFEL is that
it can handle well the bifurcations and discontinuities
that naturally occur in the parameter spaces of binary
population synthesis simulations. Such stochasticity often
poses a challenge for applying sampling and emulation
methods such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo and Gaussian
process regression emulators that rely on smoothness to
converge and produce independent samples.
Future improvements to the STROOPWAFEL algorithm (discussed in Section 4) should be able to further improve its performance. This could make it more realistic for
next-generation binary population synthesis simulations to
include detailed stellar evolution models whilst also exploring more variations in the model physics and assumptions.
Such improvements will help in comparing population models to population data, and so help to constrain the physics
of evolutionary processes occurring on timescales too long
to directly observe.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank especially T. Fragos, D. Szécsi and M. Renzo for
constructive discussions and comments. We also thank C.
Berry, R. Willcox and M. Wassink for their helpful suggestions on this paper. We thank D. Stops for technical support.
We thank the anonymous referee for their helpful comments
and careful feedback on this manuscript. FSB, AVG, IM,
SJ and JG thank the Kavli Foundation, Niels Bohr institute and DARK Cosmology Centre in Copenhagen for their
hospitality and for organizing the Kavli summer school in

gravitational-wave astrophysics 2017 where part of this work
has been performed. The work has been performed under the
Project HPC-EUROPA3 (INFRAIA-2016-1-730897), with
the support of the EC Research Innovation Action under the
H2020 Programme; in particular, FSB gratefully acknowledges the support of the School of Mathematics, University
of Edinburgh and Birmingham Institute for Gravitational
Wave Astronomy, University of Birmingham and the computer resources and technical support provided by EPCC.
FSB also acknowledges support through the McKinsey excellence grant and Kapteyn grant. SJ and IM thank the Aspen Center for Physics for hospitality whilst part of this
work was performed, supported by National Science Foundation grant PHY-1607611. SJ is further grateful for partial
support of this work via a grant from the Simons Foundation. SdM and FSB acknowledge funding by the European
Union‘s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
from the European Research Council (ERC) (Grant agreement No. 715063), and by the Netherlands Organisation for
Scientific Research (NWO) as part of the Vidi research program BinWaves with project number 639.042.728. SS is supported by the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery (OzGrav), through
project number CE170100004. AVG acknowledges support
from Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (CONACYT).
Software:
COMPAS (Stevenson et al. 2017; Barrett et al. 2018; VignaGómez et al. 2018)
Python available from python.org
matplotlib (Hunter 2007)
NumPy (van der Walt et al. 2011)
ipython/jupyter (Perez & Granger 2007; Kluyver et al.
2016)
This research has made use of data, software and/or web
tools obtained from the Gravitational Wave Open Science
Center (https://www.gw-openscience.org), a service of
LIGO Laboratory, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and
the Virgo Collaboration. LIGO is funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation. Virgo is funded by the French
Centre National de Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), the Italian Istituto Nazionale della Fisica Nucleare (INFN) and the
Dutch Nikhef, with contributions by Polish and Hungarian
institutes.

REFERENCES
Abbott B. P., et al., 2016, Phys. Rev. Lett., 116, 061102
Abbott B. P., et al., 2017, Phys. Rev. Lett., 119, 161101
Abbott B. P., et al., 2018, Living Reviews in Relativity, 21, 3
Abt H. A., 1983, ARA&A, 21, 343
Abt H. A., Gomez A. E., Levy S. G., 1990, ApJS, 74, 551
Andrews J. J., Zezas A., Fragos T., 2018, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 237, 1
Barrett J. W., Mandel I., Neijssel C. J., Stevenson S., VignaGómez A., 2017, in Brescia M., Djorgovski S. G., Feigelson E. D., Longo G., Cavuoti S., eds, IAU Symposium
Vol. 325, Astroinformatics. pp 46–50 (arXiv:1704.03781),
doi:10.1017/S1743921317000059
Barrett J. W., Gaebel S. M., Neijssel C. J., Vigna-Gómez A.,
Stevenson S., Berry C. P. L., Farr W. M., Mandel I., 2018,
MNRAS, 477, 4685
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare events
Belczynski K., Kalogera V., Bulik T., 2002, ApJ, 572, 407
Belczynski K., Holz D. E., Bulik T., O’Shaughnessy R., 2016,
Nature, 534, 512
Cappé O., Guillin A., Marin J. M., Robert C. P., 2004, Journal
of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 13, 907
Cappé O., Douc R., Guillin A., Marin J.-M., Robert C. P., 2008,
Statistics and Computing, 18, 447
Cornuet J.-M., Marin J.-M., Mira A., Robert C. P., 2012, Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 39, 798
de Mink S. E., Mandel I., 2016, MNRAS, 460, 3545
Del Pozzo W., Berry C. P. L., Ghosh A., Haines T. S. F., Singer
L. P., Vecchio A., 2018, MNRAS, 479, 601
Dominik M., Belczynski K., Fryer C., Holz D., Berti E., Bulik T.,
Mandel I., O’Shaughnessy R., 2012, Astrophys. J., 759, 52
Eglajs V., Audze P., 1977, Problems of Dynamics and Strengths,
35, 104
Euler L., 1782, Euler Archive - All Works. 530, 9, 85
Fermi E., Richtmyer R. D., 1948, ] 10.2172/4423221
Fishbach M., Holz D. E., 2017, ApJ, 851, L25
Foucart F., Hinderer T., Nissanke S., 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 98,
081501
Fryer C. L., Belczynski K., Wiktorowicz G., Dominik M.,
Kalogera V., Holz D. E., 2012, ApJ, 749, 91
Goldberg D., Mazeh T., 1994, A&A, 282, 801
He H. Y., Owen A. B., 2014, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1411.3954
Hesterberg T., 1995, Technometrics, 37, 185
Hunter J. D., 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 90
Hurley J. R., Pols O. R., Tout C. A., 2000, MNRAS, 315, 543
Hurley J. R., Tout C. A., Pols O. R., 2002, MNRAS, 329, 897
Iman R. L., Davenport J. M., Zeigler D. K., 1980, Technical report, Latin hypercube sampling (program user’s guide).[LHC,
in FORTRAN]. Sandia Labs., Albuquerque, NM (USA)
Iman R. L., Helton J. C., Campbell J. E., 1981, Journal of quality
technology, 13, 174
Jones N. D., 1977, DAIMI Report Series, 6
Kahn H., Harris T. E., 1951, National Bureau of Standards applied mathematics series, 12, 27
Kahn H., Marshall A. W., 1953, Journal of the Operations Research Society of America, 1, 263
Kalogera V., 1996, ApJ, 471, 352
Kalogera V., 2000, ApJ, 541, 319
Kalogera V., Webbink R. F., 1998, ApJ, 493, 351
Klencki J., Moe M., Gladysz W., Chruslinska M., Holz D. E.,
Belczynski K., 2018, A&A, 619, A77
Kluyver T., et al., 2016, in ELPUB. pp 87–90
Kolb U., 1993, A&A, 271, 149
Kroupa P., 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231
Kruckow M. U., Tauris T. M., Langer N., Kramer M., Izzard
R. G., 2018, MNRAS,
Liu J. S., 2008, Monte Carlo strategies in scientific computing.
Springer Science & Business Media
Mandel I., Farmer A., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1806.05820
Mandel I., de Mink S. E., 2016, MNRAS, 458, 2634
Mapelli M., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1809.09130
Marchant P., Langer N., Podsiadlowski P., Tauris T. M., Moriya
T. J., 2016, A&A, 588, A50
Mazeh T., Goldberg D., Duquennoy A., Mayor M., 1992, ApJ,
401, 265
McKay M. D., Beckman R. J., Conover W. J., 1979, Technometrics, 21, 239
Metropolis N., Ulam S., 1949, Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 44, 335
Moe M., Di Stefano R., 2017, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 230, 15
Neijssel C. J., et al., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1906.08136
Öpik E., 1924, Publications of the Tartu Astrofizica Observatory,
25, 1
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

19

Ortiz L. E., Pack Kaelbling L., 2013, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:1301.3882
Owen A., Zhou Y., 2000, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 95, 135
Pennanen T., Koivu M., 2006, in , Monte Carlo and Quasi-Monte
Carlo Methods 2004. Springer, pp 443–455
Perez F., Granger B. E., 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 21
Politano M., 1996, ApJ, 465, 338
Pols O., Hurley J., Tout C., 1998, in IAU Symposium. p. 607
Robert C., Casella G., 2013, Monte Carlo statistical methods.
Springer Science & Business Media
Safarzadeh M., Ramirez-Ruiz E., Andrews J. J., Macias P., Fragos
T., Scannapieco E., 2019, ApJ, 872, 105
Sana H., et al., 2012, Science, 337, 444
Smarr L., D. Blandford R., 1976, The Astrophysical Journal, 207,
574
Spera M., Mapelli M., Bressan A., 2015, MNRAS, 451, 4086
Stevenson S., Vigna-Gómez A., Mandel I., Barrett J. W., Neijssel
C. J., Perkins D., de Mink S. E., 2017, Nature Communications, 8, 14906
Stevenson S., Sampson M., Powell J., Vigna-Gómez A., Neijssel C. J., Szécsi D., Mandel I., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:1904.02821
Taylor S. R., Gerosa D., 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 98, 083017
The LIGO Scientific Collaboration et al., 2018, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:1811.12907
Torrie G. M., Valleau J. P., 1977, Journal of Computational
Physics, 23, 187
Tout C. A., 1991, MNRAS, 250, 701
van der Walt S., Colbert S. C., Varoquaux G., 2011, Computing
in Science and Engineering, 13, 22
Veach E., Guibas L. J., 1995, in Proceedings of the 22Nd Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques. SIGGRAPH ’95. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp
419–428, doi:10.1145/218380.218498, http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/218380.218498
Vigna-Gómez A., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 481, 4009
Woosley S. E., 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 836, 244
Zackay B., Venumadhav T., Dai L., Roulet J., Zaldarriaga M.,
2019, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1902.10331

APPENDIX A: DERIVATION OF THE
VARIANCE USED FOR OPTIMISING THE
LENGTH OF THE STROOPWAFEL
EXPLORATION PHASE
In this section we derive the expression for the variance
(Eq. 17) on the rate estimate used to optimize fexpl . We
can estimate the optimal fraction fexpl of samples that we
should spend in the exploratory phase by taking into account the probability of not identifying a target population
forming region in the exploratory phase. We assume that we
sample from the mixture distribution Q(x) which is given
by Eq. 12:
g
Q(x) = fexpl π(x) + (1 − fexpl )q(x),

(A1)

where π is the prior (used for the exploratory phase sampling) and qe is the mixture of Gaussians. We also assume
we aim to estimate the rate RT with N total samples. After
simulating these N samples we may have identified a target
binary-forming region with total weight z1 whereas a region
with weight z2 is yet unidentified such that the estimated

20

Broekgaarden et al.

rate of the target population is (Eq. 16)
Z

unidentified

RT =

z}|{
z2

z1 +
|{z}

≈ EQ [RT ].

(A2)

φ(x)2 w(x)π(x)
e
dx ≈

(

z1
z2
+
1−fexpl
fexpl
)
+
f
expl
z1

(A10)

identified

The variance on RT , VQ [RT ], is a measure for the uncertainty of the estimated rate EQ [RT ]. Therefore, the optimal value of fexpl is one that minimizes the variance on
RT . To determine this we first derive an estimate for the
variance VQ [RT ].
Using the continuous definition for the variance we have

VQ [RT ] =

1
N

Z


2
] Q(x) dx − EQ [RT ]2 .
φ(x)2 w(x)

1
N

Z

(A4)


]
φ(x)2 w(x)π(x)
dx − (z1 + z2 )2 .

(A5)

Since we assumed the target binary forming region is
equal to z1 + z2 , by definition no binaries of the target population are found outside this region and thus φ(x) = 0
outside z1 and z2 . Using this we can rewrite the integral in
Equation A5 as
Z

]
dx =
φ(x)2 w(x)π(x)

Z

Z

]
w(x)π(x)
dx.

]
w(x)π(x)
dx +
z2

z1

(A6)
We now assume that we have found enough binaries
of our target population in our exploratory phase and that
we don’t have a bias for an output function such that the
g is effectively flat over z1 . In other
Gaussian mixture q(x)
words, we assume that on the target binary forming region
z1
g ≈ π(x) .
q(x)
z1

(A7)

where π(x) is the birth distribution.
Using this in Eq. A1, we approximate that Q(x) ≈ (1 −
fexpl )π(x)/z1 + fexpl π(x) in z1 such that
1

] ≈
w(x)
(

for x in z1 .

1−fexpl
) + fexpl
z1

1
fexpl

for x on z2

APPENDIX B: TOY MODEL
We construct a toy model that can be run without too
much computational burden and is inspired by binary population synthesis simulations to study the performance of
STROOPWAFEL. The advantage of a toy model is that
the moments are analytically known and the toy model can
be repeatedly evaluated at minimal computational cost. We
use this toy model to investigate a suitable choice for the
scale parameter κ in the width of Gaussian sampling distributions (see Eq. 11).
We build the toy model in the 3-dimensional parameter space defined by the initial parameters x1 , x2 and x3 .
The distribution functions (and ranges) of x1 , x2 and x3 are
chosen to be similar to the initial parameters m1,i , ai and
qi , used for our binary population synthesis model (see Appendix C). Similarly to the birth distribution of ai in the
binary population synthesis code, we sample in log x2 . The
output of the toy model is constructed from a union of disconnected volumes D and an output function φ(xi ) given
by
(
1 if xi ∈ D
1D,toymodel (xi ) =
(B1)
0 otherwise,
where D = D0 ∪ D1 ∪ D2 is the union of three cuboids with
the following vectors for the location of the center and the
half-length of each cuboid in the x1 , x2 and x3 direction
D0 = [20, 34, 0.3] ± [1.9, 8.0, 0.1],
D1 = [40, 1.0, 0.3] ± [1.7, 0.6, 0.2],
D2 = [34, 7.0, 0.8] ± [1.8, 0.6, 0.1].

(A8)

In addition, we also assume that the our Gaussian mixture qe is negligible outside of the target binary forming reg = 0 outside of z1 . In other words we assume
gions, i.e. q(x)
that z2 is far enough from z1 that the probability is zero
to sample it with qe, and that we have completely missed it
during the exploratory sampling. By doing so we obtain that
on z2 we have
] ≈
w(x)

(A11)
i.e., Eq. 17.

and EQ [RT ] = z1 + z2 , we find that
VQ [RT ] =

z1

(A3)

where the 1/N factor comes from taking the variance of the
mean (average).
Since
w(x)
e
= π(x)/Q(x),

R
R
where we used z1 π(x) dx = z1 and z2 π(x) dx = z2 .
We can now write the variance as


z1
z2
1 
2
VQ (RT ) ≈
− (z1 + z2 ) ,
+
N (1−fexpl ) + fexpl
fexpl

(A9)

Substituting Eqs. A8 and A9 into the integral expression of Eq. A6 then yields:

The two-dimensional projected distribution of the union D
in x3 and log x2 is shown in bright green in Figure B1. One
might notice that the disconnected target regions look similar to the ‘boats’ in the game Battleship - which is often played with a strategy that is conceptually similar to
STROOPWAFEL. The fractional rates produced by these
regions are the integrals over their volumes of the local density of the birth probability distributions (the prior distribution). The fractional rate of D in the initial parameter space
equals VD = 0.0013127, where a prior (birth distribution)
of x1 ∝ x−2.3
is assumed on x1 and flat priors are assumed
1
on log x2 , and x3 . The value of VD is chosen to be similar to the average yield of double compact object mergers
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare events

21

Figure B1. Toy model illustration: distribution of the 106 samples drawn in the the birth distribution Monte Carlo (left-panel) and
STROOPWAFEL (right panel) simulation. The panels show two-dimensional projections of log x2 and x3 from the three dimensional
parameter space. In both figures the sampling density (gray) is shown through a two-dimensional histogram with 100×100 bins. Over
plotted (green) are the samples that lie within the volume VD and recover the rare outcome D. Dark regions surrounding the green areas
of interest in the right plot indicate that our STROOPWAFEL algorithm focuses more of the computational time around the region of
interest.

in the publicly available simulations6 of Vigna-Gómez et al.
(2018). In addition, the fractional rate produced from D0 is
similar to that from D1 , whereas the fractional rate from D2
is relatively 10 times smaller. (For these parameter scalings,
the absolute volume of D0 is larger than the volume of D1 ,
but the different prior distributions weight the volume of D1
more highly.)
We run repeated simulations varying the parameter κ
in STROOPWAFEL. We fix the total number of samples
to N = 106 . We know the true value for the volume integral
VD and calculate for each simulation the deviation between
the fractional rate estimate and this true weighted volume.
The closer to zero this deviation is, the better the estimate.
For each variation of κ we run 100 simulations.
The result of one such simulation for κ = 2 is shown
in Fig. B1. In the STROOPWAFEL simulation the three
islands are recovered with much better resolution than in
traditional Monte Carlo sampling from the prior. The dark
regions around the islands D0 , D1 and D2 in the STROOPWAFEL simulation demonstrate that our method focuses
more of the computational time around the regions of interest. In both simulations, the islands D0 and D1 contain
more samples than D2 , as expected.
Figure B2 shows, in blue, the 1σ deviation from the true
value for STROOPWAFEL simulations as a function of κ.
The result of repeated simulations with traditional birth distribution Monte Carlo sampling is shown as a reference on
the right. Shades of green in the background show regions
of 0.3%, 1% and 3% fractional sampling uncertainty on the
rate estimate.

6

Populations are available at http://www.sr.bham.ac.uk/
compas/data.
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

Excessively small values of κ lead to biases in the estimated rate of more than 10%. This is because overly narrow
Gaussian distributions create “holes” in the adapted sampling distribution, which then no longer completely cover or
characterize the regions of interest. As a result the refinement phase misses part of D, leading to systematic underestimation of the true rate.
On the other hand, excessively large κ values decrease
the efficiency of the refinement phase as many samples drawn
from the mixture of Gaussians q(x) fall outside the target
regions. The scatter from the true rate estimate approaches
the scatter obtained from the traditional Monte Carlo simulation as κ increases.
We find that κ & 1.5 is a robust for all our test simulations and yields substantially better estimates on rates and
distribution functions compared to traditional Monte Carlo
simulations. We therefore adopt κ = 2 (the red dotted line
in Figure B2) when sampling in three dimensions.

APPENDIX C: BINARY POPULATION
SYNTHESIS MODEL SET-UP
We test the performance of the algorithm STROOPWAFEL by implementing our algorithm in the rapid binary
population synthesis code COMPAS. COMPAS (Compact
Object Mergers: Population Astrophysics and Statistics) is
designed to study uncertainties in stellar binary evolution
models and constrain them with observations, particularly
those of gravitational-wave sources (Stevenson et al. 2017;
Barrett et al. 2018; Vigna-Gómez et al. 2018). COMPAS
interpolates between and extrapolates beyond stellar evolutionary tracks based on algorithms from the code SSE
(Hurley et al. 2000), which rely on analytic fits of single

Deviation from rate [1E-5]

22

Broekgaarden et al.

3

Rate toy model ≈ 0.001

2

STROOPWAFEL

Traditional

1
0
−1
−2
−3

.3%

100

1%

101
width of Gaussians: κ

3% uncertainty

102

Figure B2. Toy model test result: 1σ deviations from the true
volume integral VD when estimating the fractional rate using
STROOPWAFEL with different values for the scaling factor of
the width of the Gaussians κ (left panel). The true fractional
rate in the toy model is known and equals approximately 0.001.
The deviations are calculated by running 100 repeated simulations with a total number of N = 106 samples per simulation.
The green contours show a .3%, 1% and 3% fractional sampling
uncertainty on the rate estimate of the target population. On the
right the 1σ uncertainty of the traditional Monte Carlo sampled
simulation is shown with√
an error bar; this matches the expected
fractional uncertainty 1/ NT . In this work we adopt κ = 2 (red
dotted line).

ai ∈ [0.01, 1000]AU. We assume that all our binaries have
circular orbits at birth. These distributions and parameter
ranges resemble commonly used settings for binary population synthesis simulations.
Our changes to the Fiducial model from Vigna-Gómez
et al. (2018) are the following:
• We use a metallicity of Z = 0.001 for all our simulations.
• We use the DELAYED prescription for the core-collapse supernovae treatment from Fryer et al. (2012).
• We use a prescription for pair-instability supernovae and
pulsational pair instability supernovae based on Woosley
(2017). The implementation in COMPAS is described in
Stevenson et al. (2019).
We fix the total number of binaries in each simulation
to N = 106 both for when using birth distribution Monte
Carlo and STROOPWAFEL sampled simulations. The total computational time for each of the birth distribution
Monte Carlo simulations is approximately 180 CPU hours.
The total computational time of the STROOPWAFEL simulations is up to a factor of 2 lower as a result of a decrease in
average simulation time per sample in our sampling method
compared to traditional sampling (see Section 3.2). This result rises from binaries that become a gravitational-wave
source costing on average less computational time to simulate with COMPAS than other binaries.

APPENDIX D: BANDWIDTH VARIATIONS OF
KERNEL DENSITY ESTIMATOR
star evolution from Pols et al. (1998). COMPAS relies on
an approximate and parametrized treatment of the physical
processes, including for binary interactions, and can typically compute a predicted final outcome for a single binary
system within a second.
In this work the code is used to analyse DCO systems
that form through isolated binary evolution, which often involves the common-envelope phase (e.g. Smarr & D. Blandford 1976). The approach we use to simulate a synthetic population of DCOs is similar to other binary population synthesis studies (including, e.g., Hurley et al. 2002; Belczynski
et al. 2002; Dominik et al. 2012). We evolve a population
of binary systems from their birth until they form a DCO
system or otherwise either merge or disrupt. We then make
a sub-selection of the DCOs that consist of two compact
objects that merge within the age of the Universe through
gravitational-wave emission and study the properties of this
population.
In general, we follow the Fiducial model described in
Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018). We mention the most important
assumptions here. The birth distribution for the primary
mass m1,i is chosen to be a power law distribution known
as the initial mass function (IMF) where p(m1,i ) ∝ m−α
1,i
with α = 2.3 for massive stars (Kroupa 2001). For the simulations we draw m1,i in [5, 150] M . The initial mass ratio
qi = m2,i /m1,i of binary systems is suggested from observations to follow a flat distribution (e.g. Tout 1991; Mazeh
et al. 1992; Goldberg & Mazeh 1994; Sana et al. 2012)
given by p(qi ) ∝ 1. We adopt qi ∈ [0, 1]. The initial separation ai is assumed to be flat in the log, also known as
Öpiks law p(ai ) ∝ a1i (Öpik 1924; Abt 1983). We choose

Figure 8 and 9 use the same resolution (i.e., bandwidth or
bin width) to estimate the chirp mass distribution function
for the output of both the STROOPWAFEL and birth
distribution Monte Carlo simulation. The bin width of a
histogram or the bandwidth of a kernel density estimator
can strongly influence the estimated distribution. Hence, in
practice, the bandwidth should be adapted to the resolution
available in the data.
We show in Figure D1 the predicted chirp mass distribution of BH–BH mergers using adapted resolutions for birth
distribution Monte Carlo sampling and STROOPWAFEL
sampling.
We estimate the adapted bandwidth using Scott‘s Rule
−1/4
which, in one dimension, scales as ∝ NT . This is the
default bandwidth choice in the scipy kernel density estimator function. For the STROOPWAFEL sampling we
replace
NTPwith the effective sample size (ESS) given by
P
( iw
fi )2 / i (f
wi 2 ) (which, in practice, is approximately
equal to NT,STROOPWAFEL ). The top panel of Figure 9 shows
the estimated chirp mass distribution from both sampling
methods for a dimensionless kernel density estimator fac−1/4
tor for the bandwidth of ESSSTROOPWAFEL ≈ 0.044. This
bandwidth is too small for the 53× smaller birth distribution Monte Carlo BH–BH population which therefore shows
significant statistical noise fluctuations. The middle panel of
Fig. 9 shows the estimated chirp mass distribution from both
−1/4
sampling methods for a bandwidth of NT,traditional ≈ 0.12.
This bandwidth causes smaller statistical fluctuations for the
traditional sampling, but removes some of the more detailed
features for the STROOPWAFEL sampled distribution. In
the bottom panel the two plots are combined, showing the
MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

STROOPWAFEL: Simulating rare events
distributions with the relative bandwidths. The STROOPWAFEL obtains smaller uncertainties on the distribution as
well as a higher resolution, which is a result from the higher
number of BH–BH mergers found in this simulation.

0.06

BH-BH mergers
bandwidth = 0.044

STROOPWAFEL (271067)
Traditional (5163)

0.05

p(mchirp) / M

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by
the author.

0.07

23

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

mchirp [M ]

BH-BH mergers
0.06

bandwidth = 0.12

STROOPWAFEL (271067)
Traditional (5163)

p(mchirp) / M

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

mchirp [M ]

BH-BH mergers
0.06

STROOPWAFEL (271067)
Traditional (5163)

bandwidth = 0.044
bandwidth = 0.12

p(mchirp) / M

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

mchirp [M ]

Figure D1. Predicted chirp mass distribution of the BH–BH
merger population using STROOPWAFEL (orange) and traditional (grey) sampling. In all cases the simulation uses N = 106
samples and the distributions are weighted to the sensitivity of
gravitational-wave interferometers using Fishbach & Holz (2017).
Shaded regions show the 1- and 2–σ confidence intervals which
are calculated by bootstrapping the samples 100 times. This distribution is for a particular set of model assumptions, including a single metallicity Z = 0.001, and an integration over a
metallicity-dependent cosmic star formation history is required
for comparisons with observations. The same scipy kernel density estimator smoothing with a kernel density estimator factor
for the bandwidth of about 0.044 (top panel) and 0.12 (middle
panel) is used for the traditional and STROOPWAFEL simulations. In the bottom panel a kernel bandwidth of about 0.044
is used for the STROOPWAFEL method whereas for the traditional method we use a bandwidth of about 0.12.

MNRAS 000, 1–22 (2019)

