Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia (PASA)
doi: 10.1017/pas.2020.xxx.

arXiv:2001.09829v3 [astro-ph.SR] 21 Jul 2020

Common–Envelope Episodes that lead to Double
Neutron Star formation

Alejandro Vigna-Gómez1,2,3,4,? , Morgan MacLeod5 , Coenraad J. Neijssel2,3,4 , Floor S.
Broekgaarden5,3,4 , Stephen Justham6,7,8 , George Howitt9,4 , Selma E. de Mink5,8 , Serena
Vinciguerra10,3,4 , Ilya Mandel3,4,2
1 DARK, Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100, Copenhagen, Denmark
2 Birmingham Institute for Gravitational Wave Astronomy and School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham,

Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom
3 Monash Centre for Astrophysics, School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
4 The ARC Center of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery – OzGrav
5 Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA
6 School of Astronomy & Space Science, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100012, China
7 National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100012, China
8 Anton Pannekoek Institute for Astronomy, University of Amsterdam, Postbus 94249, 1090 GE Amsterdam, The Netherlands
9 School of Physics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 3010, Australia
10 Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute), D-30167 Hannover, Germany
? Email: avignagomez@nbi.ku.dk

Abstract
Close double neutron stars have been observed as Galactic radio pulsars, while their mergers have been
detected as gamma–ray bursts and gravitational–wave sources. They are believed to have experienced
at least one common–envelope episode during their evolution prior to double neutron star formation. In
the last decades there have been numerous efforts to understand the details of the common-envelope
phase, but its computational modelling remains challenging. We present and discuss the properties of
the donor and the binary at the onset of the Roche-lobe overflow leading to these common–envelope
episodes as predicted by rapid binary population synthesis models. These properties can be used as
initial conditions for detailed simulations of the common–envelope phase. There are three distinctive
populations, classified by the evolutionary stage of the donor at the moment of the onset of the
Roche-lobe overflow: giant donors with fully–convective envelopes, cool donors with partially–convective
envelopes, and hot donors with radiative envelopes. We also estimate that, for standard assumptions,
tides would not circularise a large fraction of these systems by the onset of Roche-lobe overflow. This
makes the study and understanding of eccentric mass-transferring systems relevant for double neutron
star populations.

Keywords: binaries – neutron stars – mass transfer – common envelope – population synthesis

1 INTRODUCTION

one CEE (Ivanova et al., 2013a).

A dynamically-unstable mass transfer episode initiated
by a post-main-sequence donor is likely to lead to a
common-envelope episode (CEE), in which one star engulfs its companion and the binary spiral closer under
the influence of drag forces (Paczynski, 1976). CEEs are
proposed as a solution to the problem of how initially
wide binaries, whose component stars may expand by
tens to thousands of solar radii during their lifetime,
become close binaries at later stages of evolution (van
den Heuvel, 1976). Most evolutionary pathways leading
to close compact binaries are expected to involve at least

While CEEs are frequently invoked as a fundamental part of binary evolution, the detailed physics remain poorly understood (Paczynski, 1976; Iben & Livio,
1993; Ivanova et al., 2013b). There have been efforts
in modelling and understanding the phase through hydrodynamic simulations, using Eulerian adaptive mesh
refinement (Sandquist et al., 1998; Ricker & Taam, 2008;
Passy et al., 2012; Ricker & Taam, 2012; MacLeod &
Ramirez-Ruiz, 2015; Staff et al., 2016; MacLeod et al.,
2017b; Iaconi et al., 2017, 2018; Chamandy et al., 2018;
De et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; López-Cámara et al.,
2019; Shiber et al., 2019), moving meshes (Ohlmann
1

2

Vigna-Gómez et al.

et al., 2016, 2017; Prust & Chang, 2019), smoothed particle (Rasio & Livio, 1996; Lombardi et al., 2006; Nandez et al., 2015; Nandez & Ivanova, 2016; Passy et al.,
2012; Ivanova & Nandez, 2016; Reichardt et al., 2019),
particle-in-cell (Livio & Soker, 1988) and general relativistic (Cruz-Osorio & Rezzolla, 2020) methods. Other
approaches pursue detailed stellar modeling (Dewi &
Tauris, 2000; Kruckow et al., 2016; Clayton et al., 2017;
Fragos et al., 2019; Klencki et al., 2020) or binary population synthesis (e.g. Tauris & Bailes, 1996; Nelemans
et al., 2000; Dewi et al., 2006; Andrews et al., 2015;
Kruckow et al., 2018; Vigna-Gómez et al., 2018). There
is currently no consensus on a thorough understanding
of CEEs on all the relevant spatial and time scales.
Recent rapid population synthesis studies of double
neutron star (DNS) populations have been partially motivated by the development of gravitational-wave astronomy. Software tools such as StarTrack (Dominik et al.,
2012; Belczynski et al., 2018; Chruslinska et al., 2017,
2018), MOBSE (Giacobbo & Mapelli, 2018, 2019a,b,
2020), C o m B i n E (Kruckow et al., 2018) and COMPAS (Vigna-Gómez et al., 2018; Chattopadhyay et al.,
2020) have been used to explore synthetic DNS populations in detail. Most of those studies focus on predicting
or matching the observed DNS merger rate, either by
investigating different parameterisations of the physics
or varying the parameters within the models. In particular, all of the aforementioned population synthesis codes
follow a similar simplified treatment of the common
envelope (CE) phase.
In this paper, we present a detailed analysis of the
CEEs that most merging DNSs are believed to experience at some point during their formation (Bhattacharya
& van den Heuvel, 1991; Belczynski et al., 2002; Ivanova
et al., 2003; Dewi & Pols, 2003; Dewi et al., 2005; Tauris
& van den Heuvel, 2006; Andrews et al., 2015; Tauris
et al., 2017; Belczynski et al., 2018; Kruckow et al., 2018;
Vigna-Gómez et al., 2018). Dominik et al. (2012) previously used rapid population synthesis to study the
relationship between CEEs and DNS merger rates. In
this study, we focus our attention on the properties at
the onset of the Roche-lobe overflow (RLOF) episode
leading to the CEE. We consider both long-period nonmerging DNSs as well as short-period merging DNSs. We
propose these distributions of binary properties as initial
conditions for detailed studies of CEEs. We provide the
results of this study in the form of a publicly available
catalogue1 .
We examine the properties of binaries unaffected by
external dynamical interactions that experience CEEs
on their way to forming DNS systems. We briefly discuss CEEs leading to DNS formation in the context of
generating some of the brightest luminous red novae,
1 The
database and resources can be found
https://zenodo.org/record/3593843 (Vigna-Gómez, 2019)

which may be signatures of common-envelope ejections
(Ivanova et al., 2013b; MacLeod et al., 2017a; Blagorodnova et al., 2017; Pastorello et al., 2019; Howitt et al.,
2020), and Be X-ray binaries (Vinciguerra et al., 2020).
This paper is structured in the following way. Section
2 describes the initial distributions and relevant physical
parameterisations used in rapid population synthesis.
Section 3 presents the results of our study, particularly
Hertzsprung-Russell (HR) diagrams displaying different
properties of the systems, as well as their distributions.
Section 4 discusses the results and some of the caveats.
Finally, section 5 summarises and presents the conclusions of this work.
2 POPULATION SYNTHESIS MODEL
We characterise CEEs with the rapid population synthesis element of the COMPAS suite2 (Stevenson et al.,
2017; Barrett et al., 2018; Vigna-Gómez et al., 2018;
Neijssel et al., 2019). Rapid population synthesis relies on simplified methods and parameterisations in order to simulate a single binary from the zero-age mainsequence (ZAMS) until stellar merger, binary disruption
or double compact object (DCO) formation. This approach relies on sub-second evolution of a single binary
in order to generate a large population within hours
using a single processor.
In COMPAS, an initial binary is defined as a
gravitationally-bound system completely specified by
its metallicity, component masses, separation and eccentricity at the ZAMS. We assume that our binaries have
solar metallicity Z = Z = 0.0142 (Asplund et al., 2009).
The mass of the primary (m1 ), i.e. the more massive star
in the binary at birth, is drawn from the initial mass
function dN/dm1 ∝ m−2.3
(Kroupa, 2001) sampled be1
tween 5 ≤ m1 /M ≤ 100. The mass of the secondary
(m2 ) is obtained by drawning from a flat distribution
in mass ratio (qZAMS = m2 /m1 ) in the form dN/dq ∝ 1
with 0.1 < qZAMS ≤ 1 (Sana et al., 2012). The initial
separation is drawn from a flat-in-the-log distribution in
the form dN/da ∝ a−1 with 0.01 < aZAMS /AU < 1000
(Öpik, 1924). We assume that all our binaries have zero
eccentricity at formation (the validity of this assumption
is discussed in Section 4.4.3).
2.1 Adaptive Importance Sampling
COMPAS originally relied on Monte Carlo sampling
from the birth distributions described above. However,
this becomes computationally expensive when studying
rare events.
In order to efficiently sample the parameter space
leading to DNS formation, we adopt STROOPWAFEL as
implemented in COMPAS (Broekgaarden et al., 2019).

on
2 https://compas.science/

CEEs that lead to DNS formation

3

STROOPWAFEL is an adaptive importance sampling (AIS)
algorithm designed to improve the efficiency of sampling of unusual astrophysical events. The use of AIS
increases the fraction of DNSs per number of binaries
simulated by ∼ 2 orders of magnitude with respect to
regular Monte Carlo sampling. After sampling from a
distribution designed to increase DNS yield, the binaries
are re-weighted by the ratio of the desired probability
distribution of initial conditions to the actual sampling
probability distribution.
We use bootstrapping to estimate the sampling uncertainty. We randomly re-sample each model population
with replacement in order to generate a bootstrapped
distribution. We perform this process N = 100 times to
get a 10% accuracy of the bootstrapped standard deviation. We calculate and report the standard deviation of
the bootstrapped distributions as 1σ error bars.
2.2 Underlying Physics
We mostly follow the physical model as presented in
Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018). However we highlight key
aspects of the model that are particularly relevant for
this work, along with a few non-trivial changes to the
code. See also Appendix A for a summary and additional
details on the setup.
1. We approximate the Roche-lobe radius following
the fitting formula provided by Eggleton (1983) in
the form:
2/3

0.49qRL
RRL
=
, 0 < qRL < ∞, (1)
2/3
1/3
ap
0.6q
+ ln(1 + q )
RL

RL

where RRL is the effective Roche-lobe radius of the
donor, ap = a(1 − e) is the periastron, a and e are
the semi-major axis and eccentricity respectively,
qRL is the mass ratio; qRL = mdonor /mcomp , with
mdonor and mcomp being the mass of the donor and
companion star, respectively. RLOF will occur once
Rdonor ≥ RRL , where Rdonor is the radius of the
donor.
2. We use the properties of the system at the onset
of RLOF in order to determine whether the mass
transfer episode leads to a CEE. Dynamical stability
is determined by comparing the response of the
radius of the donor to (adiabatic) mass loss to the
response of the Roche-lobe radius to mass transfer.
This is done using the mass-radius exponent
ζi =

d log Ri
,
d log mdonor

(2)

where the subscript “i” represents either the massradius exponent for the donor (ζdonor ) or for the
Roche lobe (ζRL ). We assume that
ζdonor < ζRL

(3)

leads to a CEE. Inspired by Ge et al. (2015), for
main-sequence (MS) donors, we assume ζdonor =
2.0; for Hertzsprung gap (HG) donors, we assume
ζdonor = 6.5. For post-helium-ignition phases in
which the donor still has a hydrogen envelope, we
follow Soberman et al. (1997). All mass transfer
episodes from stripped post-helium-ignition stars,
i.e. case BB mass transfer (Delgado & Thomas,
1981; Dewi et al., 2002; Dewi & Pols, 2003) onto a
neutron star (NS) are assumed to be dynamically
stable. For more details and discussion, see Tauris
et al. (2015) and Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018).
3. We deviate from Stevenson et al. (2017) and VignaGómez et al. (2018) by allowing MS accretors to
survive a CEE. Previously, any MS accretor was
mistakenly assumed to imminently lead to a stellar
merger. We now treat MS accretors just like any
other stellar type. This does not have any effect
on the COMPAS DNS population, as there are no
dynamically unstable mass transfer phases with MS
accretors leading to DNS formation (see discussion
on formation history in Section 3.1).
4. We follow de Kool (1990) in the parameterization
of the binding energy (Ebind ) of the donor star’s
envelope (mdonor,env ) given as:

Ebind =

−Gmdonor mdonor,env
,
λRdonor

(4)

where G is the gravitational constant and λ is a
numerical factor that parameterises the binding
energy.
5. For the value of the λ parameter, we follow the
fitting formulae from detailed stellar models as calculated by Xu & Li (2010a,b). This λ, originally
referred to as λb , includes internal energy and is
implemented in the same way as λNanjing in StarTrack (Dominik et al., 2012). Additionally, we fixed
a bug which underestimated the binding energy of
the envelope. We discuss the effect this has on the
DNS population in Section 3.2.
6. We use the αλ-formalism (Webbink, 1984; de Kool,
1990) to determine the post-CEE orbit, with α = 1
in all of our CEEs.
7. We use the Fryer et al. (2012) delayed supernova
remnant mass prescription, which was the preferred
model from Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018). This prescription allows for a continuous (gravitational) remnant mass distribution between NSs and black-holes,
with a transition point at 2.5 M .
8. The remnant mass of NSs with large baryonic mass
previously only accounted for neutrino mass loss
instead of an actual equation of state. This has now
been corrected. This only affects NSs with remnant
masses larger than ≈ 2.15 M .

4
2.3 Tidal Timescales
Mass transfer episodes occur in close binaries that experienced tidal interactions. The details of these tidal
interactions are sensitive to the properties of the binary
and the structure of the envelope of the tidally distorted
stars, either radiative or convective.
The equilibrium tide refers to viscous dissipation in
a star that is only weakly perturbed away from the
shape that it would have in equilibrium (Zahn, 1977).
Meanwhile, the dynamical tide (Zahn, 1975) refers to
the excitation of multiple internal modes of a star in
a time-varying gravitational potential; when these oscillatory modes are damped, orbital energy is lost to
thermal energy (Eggleton et al., 1998; Moe & Kratter,
2018). Tidal evolution tends to align and synchronise
the component spins with the direction of the orbital
angular momentum vector and circularise the binary
(Counselman, 1973; Zahn, 2008).
There are numerous uncertainties in tidal evolution.
For example, the role of eccentricity is an active field
of research. Heartbeat stars are eccentric binaries with
close periastron passage which experience tidal excitation of different oscillatory modes (see Shporer et al.
2016 and references therein). Eccentric systems may
also experience resonance locking, which occurs when a
particular tidal harmonic resonates with a stellar oscillation mode; this enhances the efficiency of tidal dissipation (Witte & Savonije, 1999a,b). The high-eccentricity
regime, previously studied in the parabolic (and chaotic)
limit (Mardling, 1995a,b), has recently being revisited
in the context of both dynamical (Vick & Lai, 2018)
and equilibrium tides (Vick & Lai, 2020). There are
uncertainties in the low-eccentricity regime: for example,
there is a range of parameterisations for the equilibrium
tide, such as the weak friction approximation, turbulent
viscosity and fast tides (Zahn, 2008).
Here, we make several simplifying approximations for
the synchronisation and circularisation timescales, τsync
and τcirc respectively, in order to parameterise the tidal
evolution of the system.
We assume that the equilibrium tide operates on all
stars with a convective envelope, regardless of the binary
eccentricity. We use the equilibrium tide description in
the weak friction model as described by Hut (1981) and
implemented by Hurley et al. (2002), although this may
not be accurate for high-eccentricity systems (but see
Vick & Lai 2020). Since the equilibrium tide is generally
a more efficient energy transport/dissipation mechanism
than the dynamical tide for stars with convective envelopes, we ignore the contribution of the latter. Our
equilibrium tide model is summarised in Section 2.3.1.
We apply the dynamical tide only to stars with a
radiative envelope. In Section 2.3.2 we present our implementation of the dynamical tide following Zahn (1977),
as used in Hurley et al. (2002).

Vigna-Gómez et al.
2.3.1 The equilibrium tide for stars with convective
envelopes
Under the equilibrium tide, the synchronisation and
circularisation evolution equations for tides acting on
a star of mass mtide from a companion star with mass
mcomp are

 2
6
dΩspin
k
q Rtide
Ωorb
=3
2
dt
τtide rg
a
(1 − e2 )6

 (5)
2
2 3/2
2 Ωspin
× f2 (e ) − (1 − e ) f5 (e )
Ωorb
and



8
de
k
Rtide
e
= − 27
q(1 + q)
dt
τtide
a
(1 − e2 )13/2
(6)


11
2
2 3/2
2 Ωspin
× f3 (e ) − (1 − e ) f4 (e )
,
18
Ωorb
where fn (e2 ) are polynomial expressions given by Hut
(1981). The structure of the tidally deformed star is
parameterised by k, which is the apsidal motion constant
(Lecar et al., 1976) and the intrinsic tidal timescale
(τtide ), usually associated with viscous dissipation (Zahn,
1977). We follow Hurley et al. (2002) in the calculation of
the (k/τtide ) factor, which depends on the evolutionary
stage and structure of the star. The mass ratio is defined
as q =pmcomp /mtide = 1/qRL and the gyration radius as
2 ), where I
rg = Itide /(mtide Rtide
tide and Rtide are the
moment of inertia and the radius of the tidally deformed
star, respectively. The mean orbital velocity and the
donor spin angular velocity are denoted by Ωorb and
Ωspin , respectively.
Given that a > Rtide , for a non-synchronous eccentric
binary we expect synchronisation to be faster than circularisation. If we assume that the system is synchronous
(Ωorb = Ωspin ), we simplify Equation (6) and estimate
the circularisation timescale as
e
τcirc = −
de/dt
 


8
k
Rtide
1
= 27
q(1 + q)
(7)
τtide
a
(1 − e2 )13/2

−1
11
.
× f3 (e2 ) − (1 − e2 )3/2 f4 (e2 )
18
2.3.2 The dynamical tide for stars with radiative
envelopes
Following the derivation by Zahn (1977) we can write
the synchronisation and circularisation timescales for
the dynamical tide as
 3
1/2 2
rg
Rtide
−5/3
τsync = 52
(1 + q)−5/6
Gmtide
q2
(8)

17/2
D
−1
× E2
Rtide

CEEs that lead to DNS formation
and
 3
1/2
21/2

2
Rtide
(1 + q)−11/6 −1
D
τcirc =
E2
,
21 Gmtide
q
Rtide
(9)
where E2 = 1.592 × 10−9 (M/M )2.84 is a second-order
tidal coefficient as fitted by Hurley et al. (2002) from
the values given by Zahn (1975), under the assumption
(violated for some of the systems we consider) that close
binaries are nearly circular. For the dynamical tide, we
set the tidal separation (D) to be the semilatus rectum
D = a(1 − e2 ). This corresponds to p
the conservation
of orbital angular momentum Jorb ∝ a(1 − e2 ). This
assumption may lead us to underestimate the circularisation timescale for stars with radiative envelopes in
highly eccentric orbits.
The dynamical tide is much less efficient than the
equilibrium tide for virtually all binaries; therefore, we
ignore the contribution of dynamical tides for convectiveenvelope stars, even though they are active along with
equilibrium tides.
Given the uncertainties in tidal circularisation efficiency, we do not include tides in dynamical binary
evolution. Instead, we evolve binaries without the impact of tides, then estimate whether tides would have
been able to circularise the binary prior to the onset of
RLOF leading to a CEE as described below.
2.3.3 Radial expansion timescale
The strong dependence of the tidal timescales on Rtide /a
means that tides only become efficient when the star expands to within a factor of a few of the binary separation.
Therefore, the rate of expansion of the star, which depends on the stage of stellar evolution, plays a key role in
determining the efficiency of circularisation: the binary
can circularise only if the circularisation timescale of an
eccentric binary is shorter than the star’s radial expansion timescale. We define this radial expansion timescale
as the radial e-folding time τradial ≡ dt/d log R. This is
computed by evaluating the local derivatives within the
fitting formulae of Hurley et al. (2000) to the detailed
stellar models from Pols et al. (1998).
2.3.4 Uncertainties in timescales
The timescales defined here, rather than fully accurate
descriptions of tidal evolution, are used as order of magnitude estimates to analyse the overall properties of
the population. Tidal timescales have significant uncertainties, including in the treatment of the dominant
dissipation mechanism (e.g. weak friction approximation,
turbulent convection, fast tides) and their parameterisation (Zahn, 2008) and implementation (Hurley et al.,
2002). Siess et al. (2013) noted the problem with the
E2 fit being commonly misused, both via interpolation
and extrapolation of stars above 20 M (see also the
alternative approach of Kushnir et al. 2017). The cal-

5
culation of k and τtide follows Hurley et al. (2000) and
is uncertain for massive stars. For the radial expansion
timescale, the fitting formulae we use are not accurate
in representing the evolution of the star on thermal or
dynamical timescales. These formulae also miss detailed
information about the evolution of, e.g., the size of the
convective envelope. Additionally, they are not accurate
in representing the effect of mass loss and mass gain.

3 RESULTS
We present the results of the synthetic population of
binaries which become DNSs. We focus our attention
on the properties of the systems at the onset of the
CEE. If a donor star experiences RLOF, leading to a
dynamically unstable mass transfer episode, the system
is classified as experiencing a CEE. In that case we report
the properties of the system at the moment of RLOF. We
do not resolve the details of the CEE, such as the possible
delayed onset of the dynamical inspiral phase. Given
that we are interested in DNS progenitors, all of these
CEEs will, by selection, experience a successful ejection
of the envelope, i.e. no stellar mergers are reported in this
study. All the data presented in this work are available
at https://zenodo.org/record/3593843 (Vigna-Gómez,
2019).
Our synthetic data set contains about 1,000,000 binaries evolved using COMPAS. Out of all the simulated
binaries, targeted at DNS-forming systems (see Section
2.1), there are 15,201 CEEs leading to DNS formation.
These provide a far more accurate sampling of the ≈365
systems that would be expected for 86,000,000 M of
star-forming mass sampled from the initial conditions.
For simplicity, we assume 100% binarity a priori. Nevertheless, given our assumed separation distribution that is
capped at 1000 AU, 10% of our systems never experience
any mass transfer episode, resulting in two effectively
single stars. While DNSs are believed to form in different environments, several studies have shown that
metallicity does not play a large role in DNS properties,
unlike binary black hole or neutron star/black hole formation (Dominik et al., 2012; Vigna-Gómez et al., 2018;
Giacobbo & Mapelli, 2018; Neijssel et al., 2019).
The results section is structured as follows. Section
3.1 discusses the two dominant formation channels in
our model, i.e. the evolutionary history of the binary
from ZAMS to DNS formation. Section 3.2 we present
a comparison with the results from Vigna-Gómez et al.
(2018). In Section 3.3 we describe the way main results
are presented. In Section 3.4 we report the properties of
the donor. In section 3.5 we report the properties of the
binary, in particular the orbital properties. Finally, in
Section 3.6 we present and report the tidal circularisation
timescales.

6

Vigna-Gómez et al.

Table 1 Properties of the donor star and the binary at the onset of RLOF leading to a CEE. In this Table, we list the
symbols and units for each parameter, as well as the figure where the parameter is presented.

Property
Luminosity
Effective temperature
Stellar phase
Mass
Envelope mass
Core mass
Core mass fraction
Radial expansion timescale
Binding energy
Eccentricity
Semi-major axis
Periastron
Companion mass
Total mass
Mass ratio
Circularisation timescale

Symbol
Ldonor
Teff,donor
mdonor
menv,donor
mcore,donor
fdonor ≡ mcore,donor /mdonor
τradial,donor
|Ebind |
e
a
ap = a(1 − e)
mcomp
mtotal = mdonor + mcomp
q = mcomp /mdonor
τcirc

3.1 Formation Channels of Double Neutron
Star systems
Two common evolutionary pathways leading to the
formation of DNS from isolated binary evolution are
identified in the literature (Bhattacharya & van den
Heuvel, 1991; Tauris & van den Heuvel, 2006; Tauris
et al., 2017). Following Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018), we
refer to these formation channels as Channel I and
Channel II.
Channel I is illustrated in the top panel of Figure 1
and proceeds in the following way:
1. A post-MS primary engages in stable mass transfer
onto a MS secondary.
2. The primary, now stripped, continues its evolution
as a naked helium star until it explodes in a supernova, leaving a NS remnant in a bound orbit with
a MS companion.
3. The secondary evolves off the MS, expanding and
engaging in a CEE with the NS accretor.
4. After successfully ejecting the envelope, and hardening the orbit, the secondary becomes a naked
helium star.
5. The stripped post-helium-burning secondary engages in highly non-conservative stable (case BB)
mass transfer onto the NS companion.
6. After being stripped of its helium envelope, the
ultra-stripped secondary (Tauris et al., 2013, 2015)
continues its evolution until it explodes as an ultrastripped SN (USSN), forming a DNS.
In Channel I the CEE may occur while the donor
is crossing the HG, i.e. between the end of the MS
and the start of the core helium burning (CHeB)

Units
L
K
M
M
M
Myr
erg
R
R
M
M
Myr

Figure
2
2
2
3, 10
3
6, 8
3,9
4
9,10
4,10
10
5
5,9
6, 8

phase. Rapid population synthesis modelling of CEEs
sometimes parameterise these donors in two possible
outcomes: optimistic and pessimistic (Dominik et al.,
2012). The optimistic approach assumes the donor
has a clear core/envelope separation and that, as a
result, the two stellar cores can potentially remove the
common envelope, allowing the binary to survive the
CEE. Throughout this paper, we assume the optimistic
approach unless stated otherwise. The pessimistic
approach assumes that dynamically unstable mass
transfer from a HG donor leads imminently to a merger.
The pessimistic approach results in 4% of potential
DNS candidates merging before DCO formation.
Channel II is illustrated in the bottom panel of Figure
1 and proceeds in the following way:
1. A dynamically unstable mass transfer episode leads
to a CEE when the primary and the secondary are
both post-MS star. During this CEE, both stars
have a clear core-envelope separation, and they engage in what is referred to in the literature as a
double-core CEE (Brown, 1995; Dewi et al., 2006;
Justham et al., 2011). For these binaries, evolutionary timescales are quite similar, with a minimum and mean mass ratio of ≈ 0.93 and ≈ 0.97
respectively, consistent with high-mass and lowmass solar metallicity values reported in Dewi et al.
(2006). During this double-core CEE, both stars are
stripped and become naked-helium-stars.
2. The stripped post-helium-burning primary engages
in stable (case BB) mass transfer onto a stripped
helium-burning secondary.
3. The primary, now a naked metal star, explodes in
a supernova (SN) and becomes a NS.

CEEs that lead to DNS formation
4. There is a final highly non-conservative stable (case
BB) mass transfer episode from the stripped posthelium-burning secondary onto the NS.
5. The secondary then explodes as an USSN, forming
a DNS.
The two dominant channels, Channel I and Channel II,
comprise 69% and 14% of all DNSs in our simulations
(Z = 0.0142), respectively. The remaining formation
channels are mostly variations of the dominant channels. These variations either alter the sequence of events
or avoid certain mass transfer phases. Some formation
scenarios rely on fortuitous SN kicks. Some other exotic scenarios, which allow for the formation of DNS in
which neither neutron star is recycled by accretion (e.g.
Belczyński & Kalogera, 2001), comprise less than 2% of
the DNS population.
3.2 Comparison with Vigna-Gómez et al.
(2018)
This work generally uses similar assumptions and physics
parameterisations as the preferred model of VignaGómez et al. (2018), including the Fryer et al. (2012)
delayed supernova engine. Although the qualitative results are similar, there are some quantitative changes
due to updated model choices and corrections to the
COMPAS population synthesis code as described in Section 2.2 and Appendix A. For example, the percentage of
systems forming though Channel I remains ≈ 70%, but
now only ≈ 14% of systems experience Channel II, instead of ≈ 21% in Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018). The main
change concerns the DNS rates which in this work are a
factor of a few lower than those in the preferred model of
Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018). Here, we estimate the formation rate of all (merging) DNS to be 85(60) Gpc−3 yr−1 .
Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018) reports the formation rate
of all (merging) DNS to be 369(281) Gpc−3 yr−1 for
the preferred model. We discuss rates in more detail in
Section 4.4.6.
3.3 Common-Envelope Episodes leading to
Double Neutron Star Formation in the
Hertzsprung-Russell Diagram
For all properties, we present a colour coded HR diagram, normalised distribution and CDF. In Figure 2,
we present our synthetic population of DNS progenitors at the onset of RLOF leading to a CEE. They are
coloured according to the stellar type of the donor at
RLOF, which is specified using the nomenclature from
Hurley et al. (2000)3 . Additionally, Figure 2 shows the
normalised distributions of luminosity (Ldonor ), effective
3 We use the early asymptotic giant branch (EAGB) nomenclature even for stars with masses m ' 10 M which do not become
AGB stars.

7
temperature (Teff,donor ) and stellar type of the donor.
In the case of a double-core CEE, the donor is defined
as the more evolved star from the binary, which is the
primary in Channel II.
In Figure 2, there is a visually striking feature: the
almost complete absence of systems which forms a white
polygon around log10 (Ldonor /L ) = 4.5. This feature
is a consequence of the fitting formulae used for single
stellar evolution (c.f. Figures 14 and 15 of Hurley et al.
2000). This white region is bounded by the evolution of a
12.9 M and a 13.0 M star at Z=0.0142. The MS evolution of both stars is quite similar. After the end of the
MS, there is a bifurcation point arising from the lower
mass system experiencing a blue loop and the higher
mass system avoiding it. This bifurcation is enhanced by
the sharp change in the Teff − L slope from the interpolation adopted by Hurley et al. (2000) during the HG phase.
This change in slope around log10 (Ldonor /L ) = 4.5 and
log10 (Teff,donor /K) = 4.4 is model-dependent, but we do
expect to have some differences in the evolution of stars
around that mass. This bifurcation corresponds to the
transition around the First Giant Branch, which separates intermediate-mass and high-mass stars. Stellar
tracks from Choi et al. (2016) also display a bifurcation
point, but models and interpolation are smoother than
those in Hurley et al. (2000).
A rare example of how a system could end up in the
forbidden region is the following. If a star experiences a
blue loop, it contracts and then re-expands before continuing to evolve along the giant branch. If the companion
experiences a supernova with a suitable kick while the
star is in this phase, and the orbit is modified appropriately in the process, the system may experience RLOF.
A fortuitous kick making the orbit smaller, more eccentric, or both, would be an unusual but not implausible
outcome of a SN.
3.4 Properties of the Donor
We report the luminosity, effective temperature, stellar phase, mass and core mass fraction of the donor
(fdonor ≡ mcore,donor /mdonor ), as presented in Table 1.
The luminosity and effective temperature limits are
log10 [Ldonor,min /L , Ldonor,max /L ] = [4.3, 5.5] and
log10 [Teff,donor,min /K, Teff,donor,max /K] = [3.5, 4.0], respectively. In Figure 2 we highlight the stellar phase,
which is colour-coded. While the evolution in the HR
diagram is itself an indicator of the evolutionary phase of
the star, our stellar models follow closely the stellar-type
nomenclature as defined in Hurley et al. (2000). Donors
which engage in a CEE leading to DNS formation can
be in the HG (4%), GB (7%), CHeB (59%) or EAGB
(30%) phase.
In the case of Channel I, donors are HG or CHeB stars;
they span most of the parameter space from terminalage MS until the end of core-helium burning, with a

8

Vigna-Gómez et al.

CHANNELI
RL
OF

ZAMS

NS

SN

Pos
t
RL
OF

CEE

Pos
t
CEE

Cas
eBBRL
OF

DNS

USSN

CHANNELI
I
ZAMS

CEE

Pos
t
CEE

SN

NS

Cas
eBBRL
OF

Cas
eBBRL
OF

USSN

DNS

Figure 1. Schematic representation of DNS formation channels as described in Section 3.1. Top: Channel I is the dominant formation
channel for DNS systems, as well as the most common formation channel in the literature (see, e.g., Tauris et al. 2017 and references
therein). Bottom: Formation Channel II distinguished by an early double-core common-envelope phase. Acronyms as defined in text.
Credit: T. Rebagliato.

CEEs that lead to DNS formation

9

Figure 2. Main properties of the donor star at the onset of RLOF leading to the CEE in DNS-forming binaries. Top: HR diagram
coloured by stellar phase: HG (blue), GB (orange), CHeB (yellow) and EAGB (purple). The sizes of the markers represent their sampling
weight. We show the progenitor of the luminous red nova M101 OT2015-1 (Blagorodnova et al., 2017) with a star symbol. The solid
black lines indicate ZAMS and TAMS loci for a grid of SSE models (Hurley et al., 2000) at Z ≈ 0.0142. We show the evolution of a
single non-rotating 16 M star, from ZAMS to the end of the giant phase: the dotted dark-grey line shows a MIST stellar track from
Choi et al. (2016) and the dashed grey line shows the stellar track from Pols et al. (1998, 2009). The dash-dotted light-blue and solid
green lines show how fitting formulae from Hurley et al. (2000) lead to a bifurcation after the MS for stars with masses between 12.9
and 13.0 M . This bifurcation is related to which stars are assumed to begin core-helium-burning while crossing of the HG or only after
it: see the presence (lack) of the blue loop in the 12.9 (13.0) M track. Grey lines indicate stellar radii of R = {10, 100, 500, 1000} R .
Bottom: Normalised distributions in blue (left vertical axis) and CDFs in orange (right vertical axis) of luminosity (left panel), effective
temperature (middle panel) and stellar type (right panel). Black error bars indicate 1σ sampling uncertainty in the histograms. Grey
lines show 100 bootstrapped distributions that indicate the sampling uncertainty in the CDFs. The CDFs show a subset of 365 randomly
sampled values, which is the same number of DNS in our population, for each bootstrapped distribution.

10
temperature range of ∼ 0.5 dex. In the case of Channel II,
donors are GB or EAGB giant-like stars. The parameter
space in the HR diagram for these giant-like donors is
significantly smaller, spanning an effective temperature
range of only ∼ 0.1 dex.
The limits in the mass of the donor are [mdonor,min ,
mdonor,max ] = [8, 29] M . The core mass fraction,
shown in Figure 3, has limits of [fcore,donor,min ,
fcore,donor,max ] = [0.2, 0.5]. The core mass fraction can
serve as a proxy for the evolutionary phase.
We report the binding energy of the envelope (see
Figure 3) as defined in Equation 4. In the case of
a double-core CEE, the binding energy of the common envelope is assumed to be Ebind = Ebind,donor +
Ebind,comp . The binding energy falls in the range
log10 (−[Ebind,min , Ebind,max ]/erg) = [49.5, 46.8]. The
systems with the most tightly bound envelopes, and
therefore the lowest (most negative) binding energies,
are those experiencing a CEE shortly after TAMS or as
double-core CEEs. For double-core systems, the envelope of the less evolved companion is more bound than
the one of the more evolved donor star.

Vigna-Gómez et al.
are [ap,min , ap,max ] ≈ [7, 3100] R . (Very rarely, even
smaller periapses are possible when fortuitous supernova kicks send the newly formed NS plunging into the
envelope of an evolved companion on a very eccentric
orbit; however it is not clear whether such events lead
to a CEE or to a more exotic outcome, such as the
formation of a Thorne & Żytkow 1977 object). The total mass distribution, shown in Figure 5, has limits of
[mtotal,min , mtotal,max ] = [9, 37] M .
We compute the mass ratio at the onset of the RLOF
leading to the CEE. The mass ratio, shown in Figure
5, has limits of [qmin , qmax ] = [0.05, 1.11]. The broad
distribution in fact consists of two distinct peaks, one
close to q = 0 and the other close to q = 1, with a large
gap between 0.18 ≤ q ≤ 0.98 (see Figure 5). The extreme
mass ratio systems correspond to CEEs from Channel
I, where the companion is a NS. The q ≈ 1 systems
correspond to CEEs from Channel II, where there is a
double-core CEE with a non-compact companion star.
The systems with q > 1 are double-core CE systems
with qZAMS ≈ 1 which, at high metallicity, may reverse
their mass ratio via mass loss through winds before the
primary star expands and undergoes RLOF.

3.5 Properties of the Binary
We also report the properties of each binary by
colour coding the property of interest in the HR diagram. We report the eccentricity, semi-major axis,
total mass (mtotal = mcomp + mdonor ), mass ratio
(q = mcomp /mdonor ) and the ratio of the circularisation timescale (τcirc ) to the radial expansion timescale
(τradial ), as presented in Table 1. All quantities are reported at the onset of the RLOF unless stated otherwise.
The eccentricity, semi-major axis and masses of the
system determine the orbital energy and angular momentum of a binary (in the two point-mass approximation).
The eccentricity and semi-major axis distributions shown
in Figure 4 do not account for tidal circularisation. The
eccentricities span the entire allowed parameter range
0 ≤ e < 1. The eccentricity distribution has a sharp
feature around e ≈ 0. Systems with e ≈ 0 are typically
those from Channel II, where the double-core CEE happens as the first mass-transfer interaction, without any
preceding supernova to make the binary eccentric given
our assumption of initially circular binaries (further discussion of this choice is in Section 4.4.3). Meanwhile, the
most eccentric binaries have the smallest periapses and
interact the earliest during the evolution of the donor,
explaining the trend of greater eccentricities for smaller
donor sizes in Figure 4.
The semi-major axis distribution, shown in Figure
4, has limits of [amin , amax ] = [330, 7000000] R . The
very few extremely wide systems correspond to very
eccentric binaries, almost unbound during the supernova explosion (e.g. e ≈ 0.9999 for the widest binary).
While those limits are broad, the limits in periastron

3.6 Tidal Timescales in
Pre-Common-Envelope Systems
Given the uncertainties in the treatment of tides, and
our interest in comparing the impact of different tidal
prescriptions as discussed below (see Section 4.4.2), we
do not include tidal synchronisation or circularisation
in binary evolution modelling for this study. Instead,
we consider whether tides would be able to efficiently
circularise the binary before the onset of RLOF leading
to a CEE. As discussed in Section 2.3.3, we use the ratio
of the circularisation timescale to the radial expansion
timescale as a proxy for the efficiency of tidal circularisation of an expanding star about to come into contact
with its companion. If τcirc /τradial,donor > 1, we label the
binary as still eccentric at RLOF. Given that the circularisation timescale is longer than the synchronisation
timescale (see Section 2.3), we focus on the former and
assume that if the binary is able to circularise, it will
already be synchronous.
Figure 6 shows the ratio τcirc /τradial,donor under our
default assumption in which both HG and CHeB stars
have fully convective envelopes for the purpose of tidal
circularisation calculations and experience the equilibrium tide. This assumption results in 82% of the systems
being circular at the onset of RLOF.
The analysis of circularisation timescales is mostly
relevant for systems formed through Channel I (see
Section 4.4.2). There are two reasons for this. The first
one is that they are expected to acquire a non-zero
eccentricity after the first supernova. The second one
is that they are more likely to have a radiative or only

CEEs that lead to DNS formation

11

Figure 3. Pre-CEE donor properties of all DNS-forming systems: mass (top), core mass fraction (middle), and envelope binding energy
(bottom). The core mass fraction is defined as fcore,donor ≡ mcore,donor /mdonor . In the case of a double-core CEE, the binding energy
is the sum of the individual envelope binding energies. Yellow systems with binding energies larger than log10 |Ebind /erg| ≈ 48.5
during the red supergiant phase are double-core CEE systems. For more details, see Section 3.4. See the caption of Figure 2 for further
explanations.

12

Vigna-Gómez et al.

Figure 4. Pre-CEE orbital properties of all DNS-forming systems. The binary properties presented are eccentricity (top) and semi-major
axis (bottom). The orbital properties do not account for tidal circularisation. For more details, see Section 3.5. See the caption of Figure
2 for further explanations.

CEEs that lead to DNS formation

13

Figure 5. Pre-CEE mass of all DNS-forming systems. The binary properties presented are total mass (top) and mass ratio (bottom).
For more details, see Section 3.5. See the caption of Figure 2 for further explanations.

14
partially convective envelope, making circularisation less
efficient. On the other hand, systems formed through
Channel II have a fully-convective envelope, which allows
for efficient tidal circularisation and synchronisation. We
apply the low-eccentricity approximation described in
Section 2.3.1 to computing the tidal timescales of these
systems, even though they are circular by construction
before the first SN (we discuss this assumption in Section
4.4.3).
4 DISCUSSION
In this section we discuss the properties of CEEs experienced by isolated stellar binaries evolving into DNSs
and present some of the caveats in our COMPAS rapid
population synthesis models.
4.1 Common-Envelope Episode
Sub-populations in Evolving Double
Neutron Stars
4.1.1 Formation channels
There are two main formation channels leading to DNS
formation. Channel I involves high mass ratio single-core
CEE between a NS primary and a post-MS secondary.
Channel I has been studied thoroughly in the literature,
e.g. Bhattacharya & van den Heuvel (1991); Tauris &
van den Heuvel (2006); Tauris et al. (2017) and references therein. Channel II involves a double-core common
envelope between two post-MS stars. A similar channel
has been proposed by Brown (1995) and Dewi et al.
(2006), among others. Channel II requires similar masses
at ZAMS driven by the need of similar evolutionary
timescales so that both stars are post-MS giants at the
time of their first interaction. For low (high) mass stars,
the difference in ZAMS mass can be up to 3 (7)%, in
agreement with Dewi et al. (2006). Our Channel II has an
additional case BB mass transfer episode from a heliumshell-burning primary onto a helium-MS secondary.
4.1.2 Sub-populations and tidal circularisation
We separate CEE donors into three distinct subpopulations depending on their evolutionary phase at
the onset of RLOF: giants, cool and hot (see Table 2
and Figure 7).
The first one, giants, correspond to giant donors
with fully-convective envelopes. The other two subpopulations correspond to HG or CHeB donors, most of
them evolving via the single-core Channel I. We distinguish between cool donors with a partially convective
envelope and hot donors with a radiative envelope. We
follow Belczynski et al. (2008) in using the temperature
log10 (Teff,donor /K) = 3.73 as the boundary between the
cool and hot sub-populations.
The presence and depth of a convective envelope impacts the response of the star to mass loss and, hence,

Vigna-Gómez et al.
the dynamical stability of mass transfer. In particular,
hot donors lacking a deep convective envelope may be
stable to mass transfer and avoid a CEE. At the same
time, some of the less evolved hot donors may not survive
a CEE even if they do experience dynamical instability
(pessimistic variation).
Klencki et al. (2020) use detailed stellar evolution
models to argue that only red supergiant donors with
deep convective envelopes are able to engage in and
survive a CEE. For their assumptions, this would reduce
the estimated rate of DNS formation. However, and
similar to this study, they focus on RLOF structures
and not the structures at the moment of the instability.
Here, we focus only on the impact of the assumed
structure of the donor on the efficiency of tidal circularisation and do not account for possible consequences for
mass transfer stability. We compare three alternative
models in Figure 8.
Our default tidal circularisation model assumes that
all evolved donors, including both HG and CHeB stars,
have fully convective envelopes, and therefore experience
efficient equilibrium tides. Our default assumption estimates that 18% of systems will be eccentric at the onset
of the RLOF leading to the CEE. This is the lowest fraction of eccentric systems among all variations because
tides are particularly efficient for stars with convective
envelopes.
In reality, CHeB stars are expected to begin the CHeB
phase with a radiative envelope and develop a deep convective envelope by the end of it. The single stellar fits
from Hurley et al. (2000) do not contain explicit information about the moment when this transition occurs.
Hurley et al. (2002) assume that all CHeB stars have a
radiative envelope and that the dynamical tide is dominant in their tidal evolution. Adopting this assumption
leads to 68% of binaries remaining eccentric at the onset
of the RLOF leading to the CEE.
Alternatively, Belczynski et al. (2008) assume that
hot stars with log10 (Teff /K) > 3.73 have a radiative
envelope, while cool stars with log10 (Teff /K) ≤ 3.73
have a convective envelope. Adopting this assumption
leads to 40% of binaries remaining eccentric at the onset
of the RLOF leading to the CEE.
According to our estimates, a significant fraction of
systems will be eccentric at RLOF. These estimates were
made within the framework of the fitting formulae for
single stellar evolution from Hurley et al. (2000). More
detailed fitting formulae, which include the evolutionary
stage of stars as well as the mass and radial coordinates of their convective envelopes, would allow for a
self-consistent determination of whether a star has a
radiative, a partially convective or a fully convective
envelope for both dynamical stability and tidal circularisation calculations.

CEEs that lead to DNS formation

15

Figure 6. Ratio of tidal circularisation timescale to the star’s radial expansion timescale for all DNS-forming systems. We present
the default scenario where all evolved stars, including HG and CHeB stars, are assumed to have formed a fully convective envelope. If
log10 (τcirc /τradial ) ≤ 0, we assume that binaries circularise before the onset of the CEE. Binaries indicated with blue (red) dots are
predicted to have circular (eccentric) orbits. We cap −2 ≤ log10 (τcirc /τradial ) ≤ 2 to improve the plot appearance. The grey shaded
region in the histogram highlights the systems which circularise by the onset of RLOF. For more details, see Section 3.6. See the caption
of Figure 2 for further explanations.

Table 2 Distinct DNS sub-populations as described in Section 4.1 and presented in Figure 7.

Sub-population
Giants
Cool
Hot

Threshold
log10 (Teff /K) < 3.73
log10 (Teff /K) ≥ 3.73

Dominant Channel
II (double core)
I (single core)
I (single core)

Donor
GB, EAGB
HG, CHeB
HG, CHeB

Envelope
fully convective
partially convective
radiative/convective

Colour
blue
orange
yellow

Fraction
0.37
0.38
0.25

Figure 7. DNS-forming binaries clustered by the donor type at the onset of the CEE. Sub-populations: (a) giant donors with fullyconvective envelopes in blue, (b) HG or CHeB donors with partially-convective envelopes in red, and (c) HG or CHeB donors which
have not yet formed a deep convective envelope in yellow. For more details, see Section 3.4. See the caption of Figure 2 for further
explanations.

16

Vigna-Gómez et al.
4.2 Common-Envelope Episodes as
candidates for luminous red novae
transients

Figure 8. CDF of the ratio of the circularisation timescale to
the donor radial expansion timescale computed at RLOF onset
leading to CEE for all DNS-forming systems. Here we present
three scenarios. The solid blue line is our default assumption: all
donors have a deep convective envelope (same as in left panel of
Figure 6). The red dashed line follows Hurley et al. (2002) with
the assumption that CHeB tidal evolution is dominated by the
dynamical tide, i.e. that CHeB stars have a radiative envelope.
The yellow dotted line follows Belczynski et al. (2008) in assuming
that stars with log Teff ≤ 3.73 K have a fully convective envelope,
for both HG and CHeB donors; and a fully radiative envelope
otherwise, as in Figure 7. For more details, see Section 3.6.

Recently, the luminous red nova transient M101 OT20151 was reported by Blagorodnova et al. (2017). This event
is similar to other luminous red novae associated with
CEEs (Ivanova et al., 2013b). Following the discovery
of M101 OT2015-1, archival photometric data from earlier epochs were found. Blagorodnova et al. (2017) used
these to derive the characteristics of the progenitor. The
inferred properties of the progenitor of M101 OT20151 are a luminosity of Ldonor ≈ 87, 000 L , an effective temperature of Teff,donor ≈ 7, 000 K and a mass of
mdonor = 18 ± 1 M (see Figure 2 for location in the
HR diagram).
Blagorodnova et al. (2017) found that the immediate
pre-outburst progenitor of M101 OT2015-1 was consistent with an F-type yellow supergiant crossing the HG.
If we take the inferred values for this star as the values at
the onset of RLOF, then this star is consistent with preCEE stars in our predicted distribution of DNS-forming
systems. However, we emphasise that the appearance of
the donor star can change significantly between the onset
of RLOF, i.e., the point at which the models shown in
Figure 2 are plotted, and dynamical instability.
Howitt et al. (2020) explored population synthesis
models of luminous red novae. Here we use the same
pipeline adopted for that study to explore the connection
to DNS populations. Doing so, fewer than 0.02% of all
luminous red novae lead to DNSs. These are amongst
the most energetic luminous red novae and would be
over-represented in the magnitude-limited observable
population. Future DNSs constitute nearly 10% of the
subpopulation of luminous red novae with predicted
plateau luminosities greater than 107 L .
4.3 Eccentric Roche-lobe Overflow leading to
a Common-Envelope Episode

Figure 9. All DNS-forming binaries from our Fiducial model are
shown here. We present the post-CEE separation af as a function of
the absolute value of the envelope binding energy |Ebind |. For the
double-core scenario, the binding energy is Ebind = Ebind,donor +
Ebind,comp . The size of the marker indicates the sampling weight
and its colour shows the mass ratio q. This Figure can be compared
to Figures 1 and 2 from Iaconi & De Marco (2019). That study
presents simulations of CE binaries and observations of post-CE
binaries. Most systems presented here do not feature in Iaconi &
De Marco (2019).

We predict that the sub-population of giant donors with
fully-convective envelopes and cool donors with partiallyconvective envelopes are likely to be circular at the onset
of the CEE (see Figures 6 and 8). On the other hand, we
find that the sub-population of hot donors often does not
circularise by the onset of the CEE. This sub-population
with hot donors are binaries with high eccentricities at
the onset of the RLOF (see Figure 4).
This result raises questions about the initial conditions
of a CEE, which is often assumed to begin in a circular orbit, both in population synthesis studies and in detailed
simulations. Population synthesis codes such as SEBA
(Portegies Zwart & Verbunt, 1996; Portegies Zwart &
Yungelson, 1998; Toonen et al., 2012), STARTRACK (Belczynski et al., 2002, 2008), BSE (Hurley et al., 2002), the
Brussels code (De Donder & Vanbeveren, 2004), COM-

CEEs that lead to DNS formation

17

Figure 10. Binary separations at CEEs leading to DNSs at the onset of RLOF (left) and after the CEE (right). We show the donor
(mdonor ) and companion (mcomp ) mass in both plots, with a solid grey line indicating mdonor = mcomp . The colour bars, with different
scales, show the pre-CEE periastron (left) and final semi-major axis (right).

PAS (Stevenson et al., 2017; Vigna-Gómez et al., 2018),
ComBinE (Kruckow et al., 2018) and customised software based on them all assume that RLOF commences
in circular binaries. Detailed simulations, such as those
of Passy et al. (2012), MacLeod et al. (2018) and others,
often make the assumption of an initially circular orbit
(but see Staff et al. 2016, discussed in more detail in
Section 4.3.2).
4.3.1 Theory of mass transfer in eccentric binaries
Mass transfer in eccentric binaries has been explored
with both semi-analytical and analytical methods
(Matese & Whitmire, 1983, 1984; Sepinsky et al., 2007,
2009, 2010; Dosopoulou & Kalogera, 2016a,b).
The analysis of Sepinsky et al. (2007) et al. assumes
fully conservative mass transfer. While they consider
mass transfer from a stellar donor onto a neutron star,
this assumption and the typical 10−9 M yr−1 mass
transfer rate they consider is relevant for low-mass Xray binaries, not DNS progenitors as discussed here.
Dosopoulou & Kalogera (2016b) study orbital evolution considering both conservative and non-conservative
mass transfer. The latter scenario is particularly relevant for DNS formation. We assume a mass transfer rate
of 10−5 M yr−1 , a 1.44 M NS and mass loss from
the vicinity of the NS (isotropic re-emission) as parameters in their Equation (44). Highly eccentric systems
(e > 0.9) have circularisation timescales of more than 1
Myr due to mass transfer, under their assumption that
all mass transfer happens at periapsis. This timescale is
reduced to around a thousand years for mass transfer in
e < 0.1 binaries, although this can be very sensitive to
assumptions about the specific angular momentum lost
at the level of an order of magnitude. The assumption of
instantaneous mass transfer at periapsis is questionable

for low-eccentricity binaries, precisely those which may
efficiently circularise through mass transfer.
Hamers & Dosopoulou (2019) noted that evolution
towards circularisation from Dosopoulou & Kalogera
(2016b) could lead to (nonphysical) negative eccentricity
solutions. They proposed a revised analytic model for
mass transfer in eccentric binaries. This study takes
into account the separation and eccentricity evolution of
an initially eccentric system at RLOF. However, their
model is only valid in the regime of fully-conservative
mass transfer, and is therefore more restricted than the
general formalism Dosopoulou & Kalogera (2016b). Mass
transfer episodes in binaries which will become DNSs are
typically non-conservative. Mass transfer from a postMS donor onto a MS companion, such as the first mass
transfer episode from Channel I, is generally only partly
conservative (Schneider et al., 2015). Mass transfer onto
a NS companion is highly non-conservative, almost in
the fully non-conservative limit (Tauris et al., 2015).
A full understanding of the evolution of eccentric systems in RLOF is yet to be achieved. A detailed treatment
of non-conservative mass transfer in an eccentric binary
could yield different criteria for dynamical stability and,
ultimately, for determining if a system engages in a CEE.
4.3.2 Modelling of mass transfer in eccentric
binaries
Numerical methods and simulations have also been used
to study mass transfer in eccentric binaries (Regös et al.,
2005; Church et al., 2009; Lajoie & Sills, 2011; van der
Helm et al., 2016; Staff et al., 2016; Bobrick et al., 2017).
Staff et al. (2016) carried out hydrodynamic simulations of a ≈ 3 M giant star with a less massive MS
companion in an eccentric orbit. They conclude that
eccentric systems transfer mass only during the perias-

18
tron passage, which delays the onset of the CEE. Each
periastron passage also makes the binary less eccentric.
Gilkis et al. (2019) discuss the passage of a NS through
the envelope of a giant star, likely on an eccentric orbit,
and conclude that the system might be able to eject
the envelope or lead to a merger between the neutron
star and the core, which they call a CE jets supernova
(Soker & Gilkis, 2018, see also Schrøder et al. 2020). The
former results in a less luminous transient, comparable
in energetic to luminous red novae (Kashi & Soker, 2016).
The interaction is driven by jets which might enhance
mass loss at periastron passages, keeping the system
eccentric (Kashi & Soker, 2018). These jets might, in
some cases, prevent CEEs (Shiber & Soker, 2018).
4.3.3 Observations of eccentric mass-transferring
binaries
Eccentric semi-detached and contact binaries, i.e. mass
transferring binaries, have been previously observed in
low-mass systems (Petrova & Orlov, 1999). Eccentric
(e . 0.2) MS-White Dwarf binaries which are believed
to have experienced RLOF are not rare (Vos et al., 2013;
Kawahara et al., 2018; Masuda et al., 2019). Jayasinghe
et al. (2019) found a more massive B-type Heartbeat star
in an eccentric (e = 0.58) orbit. Heartbeat stars exhibit
clear signatures of tidal oscillations at each periastron
passage. While there is no evidence for accretion, it is
likely that the system reported in Jayasinghe et al. (2019)
will engage in RLOF at some later point .
Sirius (van den Bos, 1960; Gatewood & Gatewood,
1978) is a MS-White Dwarf binary with e = 0.59 which,
according to canonical binary evolution dynamics, should
have circularised when the White Dwarf progenitor became a giant. Bonačić Marinović et al. (2008) propose a
model which allows for tides, mass loss and mass transfer
in an eccentric orbit, physically motivated by Sirius. Following Bonačić Marinović et al. (2008), Saladino & Pols
(2019) carried out hydrodynamic simulations of binary
stars with significant wind-driven mass loss and find that
this eccentricity-enhancing mechanism is non-negligible.
4.3.4 γ 2 Velorum as an eccentric massive
post-mass-transferring binary
North et al. (2007) reported the orbital solution and
fundamental parameter determination of the massive
binary γ 2 Velorum. This binary has a reported period
of 78.53 ± 0.01 days and an eccentricity of 0.334 ± 0.003,
with an inferred mass of 28.5 ± 1.1 M for the O-star
primary and 9.0 ± 0.6 M for the Wolf-Rayet secondary.
While γ 2 Velorum did not experience a CEE, it could
have experienced some mass transfer as an eccentric
system. Eldridge (2009) discusses γ 2 Velorum as postmass-transfer binary system. In that work, Eldridge
(2009) takes into account how the evolutionary stage of
the donor during mass transfer determines the efficiency
of tidal circularisation. They point out that a less evolved

Vigna-Gómez et al.
star with a radiative envelope is not likely to circularise
during the mass transfer phase. This would lead to a
post-mass-transfer eccentric system such as γ 2 Velorum.
4.4 Caveats and Limitations
4.4.1 CEE and delayed dynamical instability
The uncertainties in our stellar and binary models propagate to uncertainties in whether a mass-transferring
system experiences a CEE. We compare the response
of the radius of the donor to mass loss to the response
of the orbit to mass transfer to determine whether a
binary experiences a CEE (see Section 2.2). This approach relies on determining the appropriate response
of the donor to (adiabatic) mass loss, the amount of
mass that the companion can accrete, and the specific
angular momentum removed from the binary by the nonaccreted mass; all of these quantities have uncertainties
and are model-dependent. Other population synthesis
codes directly use the mass ratio at RLOF to determine
whether the mass transfer will be stable (e.g. Hurley
et al. 2002, Claeys et al. 2014).
The evolution of a mass transferring system is nontrivial. One possibility is delayed dynamical instability, in which the donor experiences a prolonged mass
transfer phase before it becomes dynamically unstable
(Hjellming & Webbink, 1987; Ivanova & Taam, 2004; Ge
et al., 2010). This can lead the donor to be significantly
under-luminous at the moment when the CEE begins,
compared to its appearance at the onset of the mass
transfer episode itself (Podsiadlowski et al., 2002). We
report the properties at the onset of the RLOF because
we do not account for delayed dynamical instability.
The opposite is also possible, where initially unstable
systems may reach a stable configuration after ejecting
only a fraction of the common envelope. Pavlovskii et al.
(2017) found that some massive giant donors with stellar mass black-hole companions, which were previously
expected to experience a CEE, might experience stable
mass transfer instead.
In general, the transition from stable to unstable mass
transfer is not fully understood. The details of the threshold of stability are regulated by the hydrodynamics of the
material lost from the donor and the thermal response
of the donor. This confluence of physical processes will
always be at play because, at the low mass exchange
rates that mass loss is initiated at, both dynamical and
thermal readjustments of the binary are taking place
on competing timescales. Accessing this regime in threedimensional hydrodynamic simulations is challenging, as
discussed by Reichardt et al. (2019) because near-stable
configurations evolve over long timescales and are susceptible to small numerical perturbations. In the case of
eccentric orbits, dynamical tides raised on the donor also
play a significant role and the eventual orbital evolution
is determined by a combination of tidal, thermal, and

CEEs that lead to DNS formation
hydrodynamic evolution.
4.4.2 Tidal evolution
Both the tidal circularisation timescales and the applicability of various types of tides are highly uncertain. As
discussed in Sections 2.3 and 4.1, we explore the impact
of assumptions about the dominant tidal mechanism
based on the evolutionary phase of the donor by considering the tidal circularisation timescale at the onset of
RLOF. While this approach makes it possible to analyse
the impact of different choices without re-analysing the
full population, it does mean that tides are not selfconsistently included throughout the evolution of the
binary.
We also make a number of simplifying assumptions
about the efficiency of tidal circularisation. For example,
we apply the equilibrium tide to convective-envelope
donors regardless of the orbital eccentricity, although
the perturbation-from-equilibrium approximation is unlikely to be valid for very eccentric binaries which are not
pseudo-synchronised at periapsis. We crudely approximate coefficients in the tidal circularisation timescale
equations based on Rasio et al. (1996), Hurley et al.
(2002) and references therein.
Witte & Savonije (1999a,b) discuss how resonance
locking could enhance pre-RLOF circularisation of a
10 M MS star with a 1.4 M NS companion. This
system is similar to the phase immediately after the first
SN in Channel I. The timescales on which resonance
locking occurs are typically a few million years and could
lead to less eccentric orbits at the onset of RLOF. It is
uncertain how much of an effect resonance locking would
have on a population of massive interacting binaries.
4.4.3 Zero-eccentricity initial distribution
We assume that binaries are circular at birth. This assumption is justified for close binaries, which are tidally
circularised at birth, but is not consistent with observations of wide binaries (see Levato et al. 1987; Abt et al.
1990; Sana et al. 2012; Kobulnicky et al. 2014 as presented in Figure 3 of Moe & Di Stefano 2017). Our goal is
to be conservative when studying eccentricity at the onset of the CEE. Thus all changes in eccentricity from an
initially circular binary are due to the subsequent binary
evolution. Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018) showed that using
a thermal eccentricity distribution at birth decreases the
DNS formation rate by about a half, but has no significant effect on the orbital properties of DNSs (we follow
the eccentricity distribution from Vigna-Gómez et al.
2018 to be able to make a more direct comparison with
those results). However, the eccentricity distribution at
ZAMS likely affects the eccentricity distribution at the
onset of RLOF. This is particularly true for Channel
II binaries, which enter the double-core CEE without
previous interactions or supernovae, thus retaining their
birth eccentricity modulo tidal effects. The current e = 0

19
peak associated with these system (see Figure 4) would
be replaced by the birth eccentricity distribution.
4.4.4 Massive binary stars
In this work we focused on CEEs during the formation
of DNSs. Similar evolutionary pathways are experienced
by other massive stellar binaries, including progenitors
of, black hole - NS or black hole - black hole systems
(Dominik et al., 2012; Kruckow et al., 2018; Neijssel
et al., 2019). The impact of eccentric RLOF is not in
the exclusive interest of DCO formation. The role of
tidal evolution and dynamical instability is fundamental
for massive stellar mergers (Podsiadlowski et al., 1992;
Justham et al., 2014; Vigna-Gómez et al., 2019).
4.4.5 Dynamics
We do not consider the impact of dynamical interactions
on the formation of DNSs. This could take the form of
dynamically-induced mergers in dense stellar environments such as globular clusters (Andrews & Mandel 2019
but see, e.g., Ye et al. 2020). Meanwhile, Kozai-Lidov
oscillations (Kozai, 1962; Lidov, 1962) in hierarchical
triple systems can drive up the eccentricity of the inner
binary (see Naoz et al. 2016 for a review) and contribute
to the formation of merging DNSs (Hamers & Thompson,
2019). Both types of dynamical encounters can change
the binary orbital evolution, including the eccentricity.
4.4.6 DNS merger rates
The merger rate of DNSs was inferred to fall in the range
110–3840 Gpc3 yr−1 with 90% confidence (Abbott et al.,
2019) based on a single detection of GW170817 with a
flat-in-rate prior (Abbott et al., 2017). The detection of
GW190425 under the assumption of a DNS progenitor
updates the local DNS merger rate to 250–2810 Gpc3
yr−1 (Abbott et al., 2020).
Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018) predicted a DNS merger
rate of ≈ 280 Gpc−3 yr−1 . After several changes in COMPAS (see Section 3.2) the DNS merger rate is now ≈ 60
Gpc−3 yr−1 . This is more in line with the reported rates
from other rapid population synthesis codes (Giacobbo
et al., 2018; Giacobbo & Mapelli, 2019b; Kruckow et al.,
2018). Chruslinska et al. (2018) pointed out that all
population synthesis models struggle to jointly predict
the binary black-hole and DNS merger rate, particularly
under standard assumptions. Most rapid population synthesis studies agree that predicted rates are difficult
to reconcile with the DNS merger rates inferred from
gravitational-wave observations, particularly if future observations push these above & 1000 Gpc−3 yr−1 . Some
particular choices of physics increase rates up to a few
hundreds of DNSs Gpc−3 yr−1 , but the typical prediction is around a few tens of DNSs Gpc−3 yr−1 . Recently,
Giacobbo & Mapelli (2020) proposed that a revised natal kick prescription might prove important to reconcile
double compact object merger rates, as suggested by

20
Chruslinska et al. (2018) (see more about natal kick
prescriptions in Section 4.5).
The impact of the power-law exponent (αIMF ) of the
initial mass function on the DNS merger rate has been
previously discussed by de Mink & Belczynski (2015).
They find that the rate can increase (decrease) by a factor
of a few for plausible shallower (steeper) initial mass
functions. Schneider et al. (2018a, see also Farr & Mandel
2018 and Schneider et al. 2018b) find that the initial
mass function of young massive stars in the 30 Doradus
region of the Large Magellanic Cloud may be shallower
than the canonical Salpeter (1955) value. While this
level of fluctuation in the initial mass function may
prove insufficient to resolve the DNS rate discrepancy
(Belczynski et al., 2018), it may be one of the ingredients.
Observations of Galactic DNSs as radio pulsars point
to a DNS merger rate that peaks at a few tens of mergers
−1
per Myr in the Galaxy; e.g., 37+24
according to
−11 Myr
Pol et al. (2020). This can be converted to a volumetric
rate in units of Gpc−3 yr−1 by multiplying the rate per
Myr per Milky Way equivalent galaxy by a factor of ∼ 10
(Abadie et al., 2010). The peak of the rate extrapolated
from Galactic observations thus falls between the typical
binary population synthesis predictions and the peak of
the rate inferred from gravitational-wave observations.
However, this extrapolation does not account for differences between the Galaxy and other environments
(Abadie et al., 2010), and all rate intervals are broad.
Lau et al. (2020) use a synthesised DNS population
to predict that a four-year LISA mission (Amaro-Seoane
et al., 2017; Baker et al., 2019) will detect 35 Galactic
DNSs. Andrews et al. (2020) predict between 46 and 240
Galactic DNSs for the same mission, depending on the
assumed physical assumptions. LISA DNS observations
will further constrain the DNS formation and merger
rates.
4.4.7 Be X-ray Binaries
The Be X-ray binary phase occurs in binaries consisting
of a rapidly rotating Be star, a MS B star with emission
lines from a decretion disk, and a NS which accretes
from this disk. This phase can be one of the intermediate
stages between ZAMS and DNS formation. We expect
that most systems formed through Channel I experienced a Be X-ray binary configuration after the primary
initiated the first mass transfer episode, spinning up the
secondary, and exploded as a supernova (see Figure 1).
The SMC Be X-ray binary catalogue by Coe & Kirk
(2015) presents 69 systems. From those 69, 44 have an
observed orbital period (Porb < 520 days). Vinciguerra
et al. (2020) used COMPAS to study Be X-ray binaries
at SMC metallicity (Z ≈ 0.0035). We focus on two particular variations from that study. Their default model
follows similar COMPAS settings as the ones in this paper, while the preferred model allows for mass transfer
to be more conservative than the default model, i.e. half

Vigna-Gómez et al.
of the mass transferred is accreted by the companion
during the mass transfer episode. The default model
predicts 190 ± 20 Be X-ray binaries in the SMC; in this
model, ∼ 59% (46%) of all (merging) DNS experience
a Be X-ray binary phase. The preferred model predicts
80±10 Be X-ray binaries in the SMC, with ∼ 96% (98%)
of all (merging) DNS experiencing a Be X-ray binary
phase. Both variations have a formation rate of merging
DNSs of ∼ 10−5 M−1 . Vinciguerra et al. (2020) show
that the preferred model better represents observations
of Be X-ray binaries in comparison to the default model.
However, there is no significant difference in the predicted DNS merger rate or the DNS mass distribution
between these two models.
4.5 Comparison with other rapid population
synthesis studies
It is challenging to compare results between population
synthesis studies. The results depend on initial conditions, physical parameterisations and computational
methods. Most population synthesis software differ in
the implementation of at least one of these, and often in
all. Some of the arguably most important physical interactions, including supernovae and mass transfer events,
are treated differently between various research groups,
codes and particular projects.
In the context of supernovae, there are several common choices for remnant mass and natal kick prescriptions. StarTrack, MOBSE and COMPAS usually follow
Fryer et al. (2012) for the remnant mass prescription of
compact objects, using either the rapid or delayed variation, while C o m B i n E use their own (Kruckow et al.,
2018). The natal kick distribution varies not only between codes, but also between papers. COMPAS initially
followed StarTrack (e.g. Belczynski et al., 2008, 2018)
with a no-kick model for electron-capture SN (ECSN)
(Stevenson et al., 2017) and more recently changed to
a low-kick distribution (e.g. Vigna-Gómez et al., 2018).
MOBSE has explored the impact of variations in the corecollapse SN (CCSN) and ECSN natal kicks (Giacobbo
& Mapelli, 2018, 2019a) and C o m B i n E use their own
natal kick prescription (Kruckow et al., 2018). COMPAS
and C o m B i n E use a distinct prescription for USSNe;
StarTrack initially did not separately account for them,
but Chruslinska et al. (2018) followed the model from
Bray & Eldridge (2016), in which the natal kick is proportional to the ejecta mass. Similarly, MOBSE evolved
from not explicitly accounting for USSNe (Giacobbo &
Mapelli, 2018) to treating USSNe as low-kick CCSNe
(Giacobbo & Mapelli, 2019a). Giacobbo & Mapelli (2020)
estimate the natal kick using the ejecta mass, similarly
to Bray & Eldridge (2016).
In the context of mass transfer and CEEs, both crucial
phases in DNS formation, the main differences appear
in the definition of dynamical instability and in the

CEEs that lead to DNS formation
treatment of stable mass transfer and CEEs.
For the definition of stability MOBSE follows BSE
(Hurley et al., 2002). StarTrack uses adiabatic mass-loss
indexes and a temperature threshold to identify stars
with a fully-convective envelope. COMPAS generally
follows BSE and StarTrack but with significant amount
of changes (see Vigna-Gómez et al. 2018 and Appendix
A). C o m B i n E use their own criteria based on a critical
mass ratio (Kruckow et al., 2018).
COMPAS and MOBSE both follow BSE to solve for
mass transfer episodes. In the default COMPAS models,
non-accreted mass leaves the binary with the specific
angular momentum of the accretor. StarTrack sets a
fixed fraction of mass transfer as conservative, while any
non-accreted mass leaves the system with the specific
angular momentum of the orbit. Kruckow et al. (2018)
follows the approach from Soberman et al. (1997).
For the CEE, COMPAS closely follows StarTrack as
implemented in Dominik et al. (2012), particularly in the
estimation of the binding energy structure parameter
λ (see Section 2.2). MOBSE follows Dewi & Tauris
(2000) and Claeys et al. (2014) to determine this λ
parameter. Additionally, MOBSE frequently has highlyefficient envelope ejection by allowing α > 1. Following
Kruckow et al. (2016), C o m B i n E self-consistently uses
their own stellar models to calculate the binding energy.
Most comparisons between population synthesis codes
come from merger rates. However, the merger-rate density is not the only prediction from population synthesis,
and the full properties of observed populations will place
stronger constraints on the physics (Barrett et al., 2018;
Kruckow et al., 2018). The population of luminous red
novae which will become DNSs do not seem to be an
unequivocal additional constraint (see Section 4.2). Be
X-ray binaries and short gamma-ray bursts must be
included as additional constrains to the observed Galactic DNS population and the growing catalogue of DNS
gravitational-wave sources to fully dissect the origin and
formation of DNSs.

21
Channel II, which accounts for 14% of all formed
DNSs, involves two giant stars, with mass ratio close
to unity, in a double-core common-envelope.
• Close to 10% of the brightest luminous red nova
transients, which have been previously associated
with stellar mergers and common-envelope ejections,
are predicted to occur during binary evolution that
leads to DNS formation. The progenitor of M101
OT2015-1 as reported in Blagorodnova et al. (2017)
is somewhat similar to the pre-CEE properties of
DNS-forming systems (see Section 4.2 and Figure
2).
• We find that tidal circularisation timescales can be
long compared to stellar radial growth timescales
(see Figures 6 and 8), especially for rapidly evolving
HG donors and/or donors with radiative envelopes
experiencing only the less efficient dynamical tide
rather than the more efficient equilibrium tide. This
indicates that ∼ 20% − 70% of binaries may not
circularise prior to the onset of CEEs (see Sections
3.6 and 4.1). This finding suggests that the ensuing common envelope phases in these binaries may
be distinct from those that have been previously
considered. Future work is needed to determine the
implication of these differences for the predicted
formation rate and properties of DNSs.
One of the main goals of this study is to constrain
the parameter space of interest for detailed evolutionary
studies of CEEs. We hope that the results presented in
this catalogue can inform choices of initial conditions
for detailed hydrodynamical simulations and lead to
an improved understanding of the complexities of dynamically unstable mass transfer and the subsequent
common-envelope phase. In particular, our present work
highlights the roles of several uncertain processes that
may be of crucial importance in DNS formation:
(i) Tidal dissipation in pre-CEE binary evolution;
(ii) Eccentric Roche lobe overflow; and
(iii) The hydrodynamics of double-core CEEs.

5 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
We carried out a rapid population-synthesis study of a
million massive binaries using COMPAS, finding 15,201
(unweighted) simulated systems which experience a CEE
and eventually become a DNS. We present the key properties of the donor and binary star at the onset of the
RLOF phase leading to the CEE. We provide an online
catalogue of this synthesised population.
Some of our main results are:
• The CEEs that occur in DNS progenitors can be
broadly divided into two types (description in Sections 3.1 and 4.1). Channel I, which accounts for
69% of all formed DNSs, involves a post-MS donor
(the initially less massive star) with a NS companion.

6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Poojan Agrawal, J.J. Eldridge, Mike Y.M. Lau,
Orsola de Marco, Noam Soker, Simon Stevenson and Eric
Thrane for discussions. We thank Teresa Rebagliato for the
graphic representation of the formation channels. A.V-G. acknowledges funding support from Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a (CONACYT) and support by the Danish
National Research Foundation (DNRF132). M.M. is grateful for support for this work provided by NASA through
Einstein Postdoctoral Fellowship grant number PF6-170169
awarded by the Chandra X-ray Center, which is operated
by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory for NASA
under contract NAS8-03060. This material is based upon
work supported by the National Science Foundation under

22
Grant No. 1909203. S.dM. and S.J. acknowledge funding by
the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO)
as part of the Vidi research program BinWaves with project
number 639.042.728 and the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation program from the European Research Council (ERC, grant agreement No. 715063). I.M.
is a recipient of the Australian Research Council Future
Fellowship FT190100574.

Vigna-Gómez et al.
A POPULATION SYNTHESIS: DETAILS
OF THE COMPAS SETUP
We present a list of the initial values and default settings
used for this study in Table 3 in order to be able to
emulate them with other population synthesis codes.
References have been added where needed in order to
justify our assumptions. Some of these assumptions are
described in Section 2.

REFERENCES
Abadie J., et al., 2010, Classical and Quantum Gravity,
27, 173001
Abbott B. P., et al., 2017, The Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 848, L13
Abbott B. P., et al., 2019, Phys. Rev. X, 9, 031040
Abbott B. P., et al., 2020, ApJ, 892, L3
Abt H. A., Gomez A. E., Levy S. G., 1990, ApJS, 74,
551
Amaro-Seoane P., et al., 2017, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:1702.00786
Andrews J. J., Mandel I., 2019, ApJ, 880, L8
Andrews J. J., Farr W. M., Kalogera V., Willems B.,
2015, ApJ, 801, 32
Andrews J. J., Breivik K., Pankow C., D’Orazio D. J.,
Safarzadeh M., 2020, ApJ, 892, L9
Asplund M., Grevesse N., Sauval A. J., Scott P., 2009,
ARA&A, 47, 481
Baker J., et al., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:1907.06482
Barrett J. W., Gaebel S. M., Neijssel C. J., Vigna-Gómez
A., Stevenson S., Berry C. P. L., Farr W. M., Mandel
I., 2018, MNRAS, 477, 4685
Belczynski K., Kalogera V., Bulik T., 2002, ApJ, 572,
407
Belczynski K., Kalogera V., Rasio F. A., Taam R. E.,
Zezas A., Bulik T., Maccarone T. J., Ivanova N., 2008,
ApJS, 174, 223
Belczynski K., Bulik T., Fryer C. L., Ruiter A., Valsecchi
F., Vink J. S., Hurley J. R., 2010a, ApJ, 714, 1217
Belczynski K., Dominik M., Bulik T., O’Shaughnessy
R., Fryer C., Holz D. E., 2010b, ApJ, 715, L138
Belczynski K., et al., 2018, A&A, 615, A91
Belczyński K., Kalogera V., 2001, The Astrophysical
Journal Letters, 550, L183
Bhattacharya D., van den Heuvel E. P. J., 1991,
Phys. Rep., 203, 1
Blagorodnova N., et al., 2017, ApJ, 834, 107
Bobrick A., Davies M. B., Church R. P., 2017, MNRAS,
467, 3556
Bonačić Marinović A. A., Glebbeek E., Pols O. R., 2008,
A&A, 480, 797
Bray J. C., Eldridge J. J., 2016, MNRAS, 461, 3747
Broekgaarden F. S., et al., 2019, MNRAS, p. 2309

CEEs that lead to DNS formation

23

Table 3 Initial values and default settings of the population synthesis model simulations with COMPAS, including pertinent
references.
Description / Name / Symbol

Value / Range

Initial mass m1
Initial mass ratio qZAMS = m2 /m1
Initial separation a
SN natal kick magnitude vk
SN natal kick polar angle θk
SN natal kick azimuthal angle φk
SN mean anomaly of the orbit
Initial metallicity Z
Initial orbital eccentricity e

[5, 100] M
[0.1, 1]
[0.01, 1000] AU
[0, ∞) km s−1
[0, π]
[0, 2π]
[0, 2π]
Z = 0.0142
0

Stellar winds for hydrogen-rich stars
Stellar winds for hydrogen-poor/helium stars
Mass transfer stability criteria
Case BB mass transfer stability
CE prescription
CE efficiency α-parameter
CE λ-parameter
Hertzsprung gap (HG) donor in CE
Core-collapse SN remnant mass prescription
USSN remnant mass prescription
ECSN remnant mass prescription
1D
Core-collapse SN velocity dispersion σrms
1D
USSN and ECSN velocity dispersion σrms
PISN / PPISN remnant mass prescription

Belczynski et al. (2010a)
Belczynski et al. (2010b)
ζ-prescription
always stable
α−λ
1.0
λNanjing = λb
optimistic
delayed
delayed
mf = 1.26 M
265 km s−1
30 km s−1
NA

Total number of binaries sampled per metallicity NZ
Sampling method
Binary fraction

≈ 106
S T RO O P WA F E L
fbin = 1

Note / Setting
Initial conditions
Kroupa (2001) IMF ∝ m1 −α with αIMF = 2.3 for stars above 1 M
we assume a flat mass ratio distribution p(qZAMS ) ∝ 1
distributed flat-in-log p(a) ∝ 1/a
drawn from Maxwellian distribution with standard deviation σ
p(θk ) = sin(θk )/2
uniform p(φ) = 1/(2π)
uniform distributed
Asplund et al. (2009)
all binaries are assumed to be circular at birth
Settings
based on Vink et al. (2000, 2001), including luminous blue variable (LBV) wind mass loss with fLBV = 1.5.
based on Hamann & Koesterke (1998) and Vink & de Koter 2005.
based on Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018) and references therein
based on Vigna-Gómez et al. (2018)
based on Webbink (1984) and de Kool (1990)
based on Xu & Li (2010a,b) and Dominik et al. (2012). Includes internal energy.
defined in Dominik et al. (2012): HG donors survive a CE phase
from Fryer et al. (2012) which has no lower black-hole mass gap
from Fryer et al. (2012)
based on Eq. 8 in Timmes et al. (1996)
1D rms value based on Hobbs et al. (2005)
1D rms value based on e.g. Pfahl et al. (2002); Podsiadlowski et al. (2004)
NA
Simulation settings
adaptive importance sampling from Broekgaarden et al. (2019)
broadly consistent with Sana et al. (2012)

Brown G. E., 1995, ApJ, 440, 270
Chamandy L., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 480, 1898
Chattopadhyay D., Stevenson S., Hurley J. R., Rossi
L. J., Flynn C., 2020, MNRAS, 494, 1587
Choi J., Dotter A., Conroy C., Cantiello M., Paxton B.,
Johnson B. D., 2016, ApJ, 823, 102
Chruslinska M., Belczynski K., Bulik T., Gladysz W.,
2017, Acta Astron., 67, 37
Chruslinska M., Belczynski K., Klencki J., Benacquista
M., 2018, MNRAS, 474, 2937
Church R. P., Dischler J., Davies M. B., Tout C. A.,
Adams T., Beer M. E., 2009, MNRAS, 395, 1127
Claeys J. S. W., Pols O. R., Izzard R. G., Vink J.,
Verbunt F. W. M., 2014, A&A, 563, A83
Clayton M., Podsiadlowski P., Ivanova N., Justham S.,
2017, MNRAS, 470, 1788
Coe M. J., Kirk J., 2015, MNRAS, 452, 969
Counselman Charles C. I., 1973, ApJ, 180, 307
Cruz-Osorio A., Rezzolla L., 2020, ApJ, 894, 147
De Donder E., Vanbeveren D., 2004, NAR, 48, 861
De S., MacLeod M., Everson R. W., Antoni A., Mandel I., Ramirez-Ruiz E., 2019, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:1910.13333
de Kool M., 1990, ApJ, 358, 189
Delgado A. J., Thomas H.-C., 1981, A&A, 96, 142
Dewi J. D. M., Pols O. R., 2003, MNRAS, 344, 629
Dewi J. D. M., Tauris T. M., 2000, A&A, 360, 1043
Dewi J. D. M., Pols O. R., Savonije G. J., van den Heuvel
E. P. J., 2002, MNRAS, 331, 1027
Dewi J. D. M., Podsiadlowski P., Pols O. R., 2005, MNRAS, 363, L71
Dewi J. D. M., Podsiadlowski P., Sena A., 2006, MNRAS,

368, 1742
Dominik M., Belczynski K., Fryer C., Holz D. E., Berti
E., Bulik T., Mandel I., O’Shaughnessy R., 2012, ApJ,
759, 52
Dosopoulou F., Kalogera V., 2016a, ApJ, 825, 70
Dosopoulou F., Kalogera V., 2016b, ApJ, 825, 71
Eggleton P. P., 1983, ApJ, 268, 368
Eggleton P. P., Kiseleva L. G., Hut P., 1998, ApJ, 499,
853
Eldridge J. J., 2009, MNRAS, 400, L20
Farr W. M., Mandel I., 2018, Science, 361, aat6506
Fragos T., Andrews J. J., Ramirez-Ruiz E., Meynet G.,
Kalogera V., Taam R. E., Zezas A., 2019, ApJ, 883,
L45
Fryer C. L., Belczynski K., Wiktorowicz G., Dominik
M., Kalogera V., Holz D. E., 2012, ApJ, 749, 91
Gatewood G. D., Gatewood C. V., 1978, ApJ, 225, 191
Ge H., Hjellming M. S., Webbink R. F., Chen X., Han
Z., 2010, ApJ, 717, 724
Ge H., Webbink R. F., Chen X., Han Z., 2015, ApJ, 812,
40
Giacobbo N., Mapelli M., 2018, MNRAS, 480, 2011
Giacobbo N., Mapelli M., 2019a, MNRAS, 482, 2234
Giacobbo N., Mapelli M., 2019b, MNRAS, 486, 2494
Giacobbo N., Mapelli M., 2020, ApJ, 891, 141
Giacobbo N., Mapelli M., Spera M., 2018, MNRAS, 474,
2959
Gilkis A., Soker N., Kashi A., 2019, MNRAS, 482, 4233
Hamann W. R., Koesterke L., 1998, A&A, 335, 1003
Hamers A. S., Dosopoulou F., 2019, ApJ, 872, 119
Hamers A. S., Thompson T. A., 2019, ApJ, 883, 23
Hjellming M. S., Webbink R. F., 1987, ApJ, 318, 794

24
Hobbs G., Lorimer D. R., Lyne A. G., Kramer M., 2005,
MNRAS, 360, 974
Howitt G., Stevenson S., Vigna-Gómez A. r., Justham
S., Ivanova N., Woods T. E., Neijssel C. J., Mandel
I., 2020, MNRAS, 492, 3229
Hurley J. R., Pols O. R., Tout C. A., 2000, MNRAS,
315, 543
Hurley J. R., Tout C. A., Pols O. R., 2002, MNRAS,
329, 897
Hut P., 1981, A&A, 99, 126
Iaconi R., De Marco O., 2019, MNRAS, 490, 2550
Iaconi R., Reichardt T., Staff J., De Marco O., Passy
J.-C., Price D., Wurster J., Herwig F., 2017, MNRAS,
464, 4028
Iaconi R., De Marco O., Passy J.-C., Staff J., 2018,
MNRAS, 477, 2349
Iben Jr. I., Livio M., 1993, PASP, 105, 1373
Ivanova N., Nandez J. L. A., 2016, MNRAS, 462, 362
Ivanova N., Taam R. E., 2004, ApJ, 601, 1058
Ivanova N., Belczynski K., Kalogera V., Rasio F. A.,
Taam R. E., 2003, ApJ, 592, 475
Ivanova N., et al., 2013a, A&A Rev., 21, 59
Ivanova N., Justham S., Avendano Nandez J. L., Lombardi J. C., 2013b, Science, 339, 433
Jayasinghe T., Stanek K. Z., Kochanek C. S., Thompson
T. A., Shappee B. J., Fausnaugh M., 2019, MNRAS,
p. 2120
Justham S., Podsiadlowski P., Han Z., 2011, MNRAS,
410, 984
Justham S., Podsiadlowski P., Vink J. S., 2014, The
Astrophysical Journal, 796, 121
Kashi A., Soker N., 2016, Research in Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 16, 99
Kashi A., Soker N., 2018, MNRAS, 480, 3195
Kawahara H., Masuda K., MacLeod M., Latham D. W.,
Bieryla A., Benomar O., 2018, AJ, 155, 144
Klencki J., Nelemans G., Istrate A. G., Chruslinska M.,
2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2006.11286
Kobulnicky H. A., et al., 2014, ApJS, 213, 34
Kozai Y., 1962, The Astronomical Journal, 67, 591
Kroupa P., 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231
Kruckow M. U., Tauris T. M., Langer N., Szécsi D.,
Marchant P., Podsiadlowski P., 2016, A&A, 596, A58
Kruckow M. U., Tauris T. M., Langer N., Kramer M.,
Izzard R. G., 2018, MNRAS, 481, 1908
Kushnir D., Zaldarriaga M., Kollmeier J. A., Waldman
R., 2017, MNRAS, 467, 2146
Lajoie C.-P., Sills A., 2011, ApJ, 726, 67
Lau M. Y. M., Mandel I., Vigna-Gómez A., Neijssel
C. J., Stevenson S., Sesana A., 2020, MNRAS, 492,
3061
Lecar M., Wheeler J. C., McKee C. F., 1976, ApJ, 205,
556
Levato H., Malaroda S., Morrell N., Solivella G., 1987,

Vigna-Gómez et al.
ApJS, 64, 487
Li X., Chang P., Levin Y., Matzner C. D., Armitage
P. J., 2020, MNRAS, 494, 2327
Lidov M., 1962, Planetary and Space Science, 9, 719
Livio M., Soker N., 1988, ApJ, 329, 764
Lombardi Jr. J. C., Proulx Z. F., Dooley K. L., Theriault
E. M., Ivanova N., Rasio F. A., 2006, ApJ, 640, 441
López-Cámara D., De Colle F., Moreno Méndez E., 2019,
MNRAS, 482, 3646
MacLeod M., Ramirez-Ruiz E., 2015, ApJ, 803, 41
MacLeod M., Macias P., Ramirez-Ruiz E., Grindlay J.,
Batta A., Montes G., 2017a, ApJ, 835, 282
MacLeod M., Antoni A., Murguia-Berthier A., Macias
P., Ramirez-Ruiz E., 2017b, ApJ, 838, 56
MacLeod M., Ostriker E. C., Stone J. M., 2018, ApJ,
863, 5
Mardling R. A., 1995a, ApJ, 450, 722
Mardling R. A., 1995b, ApJ, 450, 732
Masuda K., Kawahara H., Latham D. W., Bieryla A.,
Kunitomo M., MacLeod M., Aoki W., 2019, ApJ, 881,
L3
Matese J. J., Whitmire D. P., 1983, ApJ, 266, 776
Matese J. J., Whitmire D. P., 1984, ApJ, 282, 522
Moe M., Di Stefano R., 2017, ApJS, 230, 15
Moe M., Kratter K. M., 2018, ApJ, 854, 44
Nandez J. L. A., Ivanova N., 2016, MNRAS, 460, 3992
Nandez J. L. A., Ivanova N., Lombardi J. C. J., 2015,
MNRAS, 450, L39
Naoz S., Fragos T., Geller A., Stephan A. P., Rasio F. A.,
2016, ApJ, 822, L24
Neijssel C. J., et al., 2019, MNRAS, p. 2457
Nelemans G., Verbunt F., Yungelson L. R., Portegies
Zwart S. F., 2000, A&A, 360, 1011
North J. R., Tuthill P. G., Tango W. J., Davis J., 2007,
MNRAS, 377, 415
Ohlmann S. T., Röpke F. K., Pakmor R., Springel V.,
2016, ApJ, 816, L9
Ohlmann S. T., Röpke F. K., Pakmor R., Springel V.,
2017, A&A, 599, A5
Öpik E., 1924, Publications of the Tartu Astrofizica
Observatory, 25
Paczynski B., 1976, in Eggleton P., Mitton S., Whelan J.,
eds, IAU Symposium Vol. 73, Structure and Evolution
of Close Binary Systems. p. 75
Passy J.-C., et al., 2012, ApJ, 744, 52
Pastorello A., et al., 2019, A&A, 630, A75
Pavlovskii K., Ivanova N., Belczynski K., Van K. X.,
2017, MNRAS, 465, 2092
Petrova A. V., Orlov V. V., 1999, AJ, 117, 587
Pfahl E., Rappaport S., Podsiadlowski P., 2002, ApJ,
571, L37
Podsiadlowski P., Joss P. C., Hsu J. J. L., 1992, ApJ,
391, 246

CEEs that lead to DNS formation
Podsiadlowski P., Rappaport S., Pfahl E. D., 2002, ApJ,
565, 1107
Podsiadlowski P., Langer N., Poelarends A. J. T., Rappaport S., Heger A., Pfahl E., 2004, ApJ, 612, 1044
Pol N., McLaughlin M., Lorimer D. R., 2020, Research
Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 4, 22
Pols O. R., Schröder K.-P., Hurley J. R., Tout C. A.,
Eggleton P. P., 1998, MNRAS, 298, 525
Pols O. R., Schroeder K. P., Hurley J. R., Tout C. A.,
Eggleton P. P., 2009, VizieR Online Data Catalog, p.
J/MNRAS/298/525
Portegies Zwart S. F., Verbunt F., 1996, A&A, 309, 179
Portegies Zwart S. F., Yungelson L. R., 1998, A&A, 332,
173
Prust L. J., Chang P., 2019, MNRAS, 486, 5809
Rasio F. A., Livio M., 1996, ApJ, 471, 366
Rasio F. A., Tout C. A., Lubow S. H., Livio M., 1996,
ApJ, 470, 1187
Regös E., Bailey V. C., Mardling R., 2005, MNRAS,
358, 544
Reichardt T. A., De Marco O., Iaconi R., Tout C. A.,
Price D. J., 2019, MNRAS, 484, 631
Ricker P. M., Taam R. E., 2008, ApJ, 672, L41
Ricker P. M., Taam R. E., 2012, ApJ, 746, 74
Saladino M. I., Pols O. R., 2019, A&A, 629, A103
Salpeter E. E., 1955, ApJ, 121, 161
Sana H., et al., 2012, Science, 337, 444
Sandquist E. L., Taam R. E., Chen X., Bodenheimer P.,
Burkert A., 1998, ApJ, 500, 909
Schneider F. R. N., Izzard R. G., Langer N., de Mink
S. E., 2015, ApJ, 805, 20
Schneider F. R. N., et al., 2018a, Science, 359, 69
Schneider F. R. N., et al., 2018b, Science, 361, aat7032
Schrøder S. L., MacLeod M., Loeb A., Vigna-Gómez A.,
Mandel I., 2020, ApJ, 892, 13
Sepinsky J. F., Willems B., Kalogera V., Rasio F. A.,
2007, ApJ, 667, 1170
Sepinsky J. F., Willems B., Kalogera V., Rasio F. A.,
2009, ApJ, 702, 1387
Sepinsky J. F., Willems B., Kalogera V., Rasio F. A.,
2010, ApJ, 724, 546
Shiber S., Soker N., 2018, MNRAS, 477, 2584
Shiber S., Iaconi R., De Marco O., Soker N., 2019, MNRAS, 488, 5615
Shporer A., et al., 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 829,
34
Siess L., Izzard R. G., Davis P. J., Deschamps R., 2013,
A&A, 550, A100
Soberman G. E., Phinney E. S., van den Heuvel E. P. J.,
1997, A&A, 327, 620
Soker N., Gilkis A., 2018, MNRAS, 475, 1198
Staff J. E., De Marco O., Macdonald D., Galaviz P.,
Passy J.-C., Iaconi R., Mac Low M.-M., 2016, MNRAS,

25
455, 3511
Stevenson S., Vigna-Gómez A., Mandel I., Barrett J. W.,
Neijssel C. J., Perkins D., de Mink S. E., 2017, Nature
Communications, 8, 14906
Tauris T. M., Bailes M., 1996, A&A, 315, 432
Tauris T. M., van den Heuvel E. P. J., 2006, Formation and evolution of compact stellar X-ray sources.
Cambridge University Press, pp 623–665
Tauris T. M., Langer N., Moriya T. J., Podsiadlowski
P., Yoon S.-C., Blinnikov S. I., 2013, ApJ, 778, L23
Tauris T. M., Langer N., Podsiadlowski P., 2015, MNRAS, 451, 2123
Tauris T. M., et al., 2017, ApJ, 846, 170
Thorne K. S., Żytkow A. N., 1977, ApJ, 212, 832
Timmes F. X., Woosley S. E., Weaver T. A., 1996, ApJ,
457, 834
Toonen S., Nelemans G., Portegies Zwart S., 2012, A&A,
546, A70
van den Bos W. H., 1960, Journal des Observateurs, 43,
145
van den Heuvel E. P. J., 1976, in Eggleton P., Mitton S.,
Whelan J., eds, IAU Symposium Vol. 73, Structure
and Evolution of Close Binary Systems. p. 35
van der Helm E., Portegies Zwart S., Pols O., 2016,
MNRAS, 455, 462
Vick M., Lai D., 2018, MNRAS, 476, 482
Vick M., Lai D., 2020, MNRAS,
Vigna-Gómez A., et al., 2018, MNRAS, 481, 4009
Vigna-Gómez A., Justham S., Mandel I., de Mink S. E.,
Podsiadlowski P., 2019, ApJ, 876, L29
Vigna-Gómez A., 2019, Dataset from: Common–Envelope Episodes that lead to Double
Neutron Star formation, doi:10.5281/zenodo.3593843,
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3593843
Vinciguerra S., et al., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2003.00195
Vink J. S., de Koter A., 2005, A&A, 442, 587
Vink J. S., de Koter A., Lamers H. J. G. L. M., 2000,
A&A, 362, 295
Vink J. S., de Koter A., Lamers H. J. G. L. M., 2001,
A&A, 369, 574
Vos J., Østensen R. H., Németh P., Green E. M., Heber
U., Van Winckel H., 2013, A&A, 559, A54
Webbink R. F., 1984, ApJ, 277, 355
Witte M. G., Savonije G. J., 1999a, A&A, 341, 842
Witte M. G., Savonije G. J., 1999b, A&A, 350, 129
Xu X.-J., Li X.-D., 2010a, ApJ, 716, 114
Xu X.-J., Li X.-D., 2010b, ApJ, 722, 1985
Ye C. S., Fong W.-f., Kremer K., Rodriguez C. L., Chatterjee S., Fragione G., Rasio F. A., 2020, ApJ, 888,
L10
Zahn J.-P., 1975, A&A, 41, 329
Zahn J.-P., 1977, A&A, 57, 383

26
Zahn J. P., 2008, in Goupil M. J., Zahn J. P.,
eds, EAS Publications Series Vol. 29, EAS Publications Series. pp 67–90 (arXiv:0807.4870),
doi:10.1051/eas:0829002
de Mink S. E., Belczynski K., 2015, ApJ, 814, 58

Vigna-Gómez et al.

